I was going to applaud, too. Well, thank you, Jim. And thanks to the people of San Diego for giving us this opportunity to have another discussion about the decision we all face in front of people who will make the decision. Again, I will say I will do my best to make this a discussion of ideas and issues, not insults. What really matters is what happens to your future and what happens to our country as we stand on the brink of a new century, a time of extraordinary possibility. I have a simple philosophy that I tried to follow for the last four years: Do what creates opportunity for all, what reinforces responsibility from all of us, and what will help us build a community where everybody’s got a role to play and a place at the table. Compared to four years ago, we’re clearly better off. We’ve got ten and a half million more jobs, the deficit’s been reduced by 60 percent. Incomes are rising for the first time in a decade, the crime rates, the welfare rolls are falling, we’re putting , 100,000 more police on the street. 60,000 felons, fugitives and stalkers have been denied handguns. But that progress is only the beginning. What we really should focus on tonight is what we still have to do to help the American people make the most of this future that’s out there. I think what really matters is what we can do to build strong families. Strong families need a strong economy. To me that means we have to go on and balance this budget while we protect Medicare and Medicaid and education and the environment. We should give a tax cut, targeted to child rearing and education, to buying a first home and paying for health care. We ought to help protect our kids from drugs and guns and gangs and tobacco. We ought to help move a million people from welfare to work and we ought to create the finest education system in the world where every 18-year-old can go on to college and all of our younger children have great educational opportunities. If we do those things, we can build that bridge to the 21st century. That’s what I hope to get to talk about tonight. Thank you.

One of the reasons that I ran for president, Sandy, is because not just children, a lot of grownups felt that way. And if you remember four years ago, we had not only rising unemployment, but a lot of rising cynicism. I had never worked in Washington as an elected official. It seemed to me that most of the arguments were partisan, Republican, Democrat, left, right, liberal, conservative. That’s why I said tonight I’m for opportunity, responsibility and community. And we’ve gotten some real progress in the last four years. I’ve also done everything I could at every moment of division in this country, after Oklahoma City, when these churches were burned, to bring people together and remind people that we are stronger because of our diversity. We have to respect one another. You mentioned Washington and Lincoln. They were presidents at historic times. This is an historic time. It’s important we go beyond those old partisan arguments and focus on people and their future. When we do that, instead of shutting the government down over a partisan fight over the budget, we’re a better country and that’s why we’re making progress now.

I will. First of all, let me say what we have done. In the last four years we’ve worked hard to promote more competition to bring down the rate of inflation in health care costs without eroding health care quality. The government pays for Medicare and Medicaid, as you know, and that’s very important. Secondly, we’ve added a million more children to the ranks of the insured through the Medicaid program. We have protected 25 million people through the passage of the Kennedy-Kassebaum bill that says you can use your health insurance if you change jobs or someone in your family has been sick. We just recently ended those drive-by deliveries saying people can’t be kicked out of the hospital by insurance companies when they’ve just had babies. So this is, that’s a good start. In the next four years, I want to focus on the following things. Number one, add another million children to the insured ranks through the Medicaid program. Number two, keep working with the states, as we are now, to add 2.2 million more people to the insurance system. Number three, cover people who are between jobs for up to six months. That could protect 3 million families, 700,000 kids. Number four, make sure we protect the integrity with the Medicare program and Medicaid program and not do anything in cutting costs which would cause hundreds of hospitals to close which could have been the case if the 270billion dollar Medicare cut that I vetoed, had been enacted in the law.

I don’t have time in 30 seconds to respond to fix all that. But let me just say the American Hospital Association said that the budget I vetoed could have closed 700 hospitals. Not me. On a per-person basis, it did cut way below the rate of inflation in medical costs. But the important thing is what are we going to do now? We need to help people who are between jobs. We need to cover more kids. Provide more preventative care. My balanced budget covers mammograms for ladies, women on Medicare and also gives respite care to the million-plus families who have someone with Alzheimerâ€™s. These things are paid for in the balanced budget plan. It’ll move us forward.

May I ask you a question? What service are you in?

And what kind of small business do you have?

Good for you. Let me say, if Senator Dole mentioned this, I just signed a bill that we got through Congress to increase the amount of pay increase we could give for military personnel and to make sure the pay increase this year was above the rate of inflation. I also presented to the Congress and they adopted a large package of quality-of-life improvements, which are very important. I spent a lot of time talking to military families as well as military members all over the world and in bases all across the United States, and I became convinced after talking to the families and the personnel in uniform that we needed to not only have the pay raise but we needed to invest more in child care, housing, and other things to support families, especially when there are longer deployments because of the downsizing of the military. So I, we’re going to do better, and we’ll do better still, but this is a commitment I think that all Americans share without regard to party.

Let me just take two seconds of my time because I’m the Commander-in-Chief to respond to one thing that was said. I propose to spend 1.6 trillion dollars on defense between now and the year 2002 and there’s less than 1 percent difference between my budget and the Republican budget on defense. Now, on the Middle East, as you know, I worked very hard for peace in the Middle East. The agreement between the Palestinians and the Israelis was signed at the White House and the agreement — the peace treaty with Jordan, I was — I went to Jordan to sign that — to be there. But — and I think the United States can do whatever we reasonably can. I can say this: I do not believe Yassir Arafat wants us to send troops to the West Bank. We have never been asked to send troops to the West Bank. I saw the agreement that Prime Minister Rabin and Yassir Arafat signed on the West Bank. It had 26 separate maps they had to sign, literally thousands of delineations of who would do what on the West Bank, and I believe if the parties will get together and in a good-faith manner make that agreement, that they’ll be able to do it if we cannot impose a peace on the Middle East. My position has always been that the job of the United States was to minimize the risks of peace. You know, if they asked me to be part of some monitoring force — as we are in the Sinai and have been since 1978 — to monitor the peace between Egypt and Israel, frankly, I would have to think about it. I would have to see what they wanted to do, but I don’t believe that will be the request. I think what Mr. Arafat wants us to do is to make sure that everybody honors the agreements they’ve already made. That’s why I brought the leaders to Washington a few days ago. I think they will, and I think we’ll get there. Don’t be too discouraged.

When the change of government occurred in Israel, the people of Israel were saying we don’t want to abandon the peace process. We want more security. Then a lot of mutual distrust developed. A lot of things happened which maybe shouldn’t have happened. When I asked Yassir Arafat and Prime Minister Netanyahu to come to Washington and got them together and they talked alone for three hours, I was convinced that they had to have a chance to make that peace. Again, I’d say if they asked us to play some reasonable role, I don’t know how I would respond. It would depend entirely on what they asked us to do, but the real secret there is for them to abide by the agreements they’ve made and find a way to trust each other, and they’re going to have to spend some time and trust each other. Prime Minister Rabin gave his life believing that that trust could be materialized, and I still think it can be.

Oscar, the question of what the federal government should do to limit the access of tobacco to young people is one of the biggest differences between Senator Dole and me. We did propose a regulation six months after I became President under the law he mentioned. It simply says all these states — it made it illegal for kids to smoke. Now they have to try harder if they want to keep getting federal funds. Then we took comments, as we always do, and there were tens of thousands of comments as to how we ought to do it. That’s what drug it out. Meanwhile, we started the — also in ’93 to look into whether cigarettes were addictive enough for the Federal Food and Drug Administration to ban the ability of cigarette companies to advertise, market and distribute their products to our kids. No president had ever taken on the tobacco lobby before. I did. Senator Dole opposed me. He went down and made a speech to people who were on his side saying that I did the wrong thing. I think I did the right thing. On drugs, I have repeatedly said drugs are wrong and illegal and can kill you. We have strengthened enforcement, and everybody in San Diego knows we strengthened control of the border. We have done a lot more, and I hope we get a chance to talk about it.

First of all, there are two different things. Social Security and Medicare are entirely different in terms of the financial stabilities. Let’s talk about them separately. Social Security is stable until, as you pointed out, at least the third decade of the next century. But we’d like to have a Social Security fund that has about 70 years of life instead of about 30 years of life. What we have to do is simply to make some adjustments to take account of the fact that the baby boomers, people like me, are bigger in number than the people that went just before us and the people that come just after us. And I think what we’ll plainly do is what we did in 1983 when Senator Dole served, and this is something I think he did a good job on when he served on the Social Security commission and they made some modest changes in Social Security to make sure that it would be alive and well into the 21st century. And we will do that. It’s obvious that there are certain things that have to be done and there are 50 or 60 different options, and a bipartisan commission to take it out of politics, will make recommendations and build support for the people. Medicare is different. Medicare needs help now. I have proposed a budget which would put ten years on the life of the Medicare trust fund. That’s more than it’s had a lot of the time in the last years. It would save a lot of money through more managed care, by giving more options, more preventative care and lowering the inflation rate and the prices we’re paying providers without having the kind of big premium increases and out-of-pocket costs that the budget I vetoed would provide. Then that would give us ten years to do with Medicare what we’re going to do with Social Security; have a bipartisan group look at what we have to do to save it when the baby boomers retire. But now we can, we ought to pass this budget now and put ten years on it right away so no one has to worry about it.

Their idea was to have the poorest seniors in the country pay $270 more this year. Their idea was a budget that the that the American Hospital Association said could close 700 hospitals. Their idea was to charge everybody more out-of-pocket costs in their budget that I vetoed. Not in an election year, sir. I told them in early ’95. Senator Dole said 30 years ago he was one of 12 people who voted against Medicare and he was proud of it. A year ago he said, “I was right then. I knew it wouldn’t work.” American seniors have the highest life expectancy in the world. We need to reform it. Not wreck it.

It’s illegal right now and has been for years for illegal immigrants to get welfare benefits. Let me say that this is one of the most important issues in the world to me. I started working on welfare reform in 1980 because I was sick of seeing people trapped in a system that was increasingly isolating them and making their kids more vulnerable to get in trouble. So I’ve been working on it when I was a governor for a long time. When I became president I used the authority I had in this law to get out from certain federal rules to help states move people to work. We reduced the welfare rolls by 2 million already. Now, I’ve got a plan with this new welfare reform law to work with the private sector, to give employees specific tax incentives to hire people off welfare, and to do some other things which will create more jobs in the private sector, at least a million, and move more people from welfare to work. It’s very important. And I hope we get a chance to talk about this more. There’s not a more important issue. I, I still remember a woman that I met ten years ago who said she wanted to get off welfare so her kids could tell, give an answer when they say, “What does your mother do for a job?” I met that woman again. She’s got four kids. One’s got a good job, one’s studying to be a doctor. One’s in technical school, one’s an honor student in high school. I want to make more people like that woman, Lily Harden, so I’ve got a plan to do it, and it’s just beginning.

First of all, we have a big plan to reduce the capital gains tax when people sell their homes. Part of my tax package which is paid for in my balanced budget plan would exempt up to half a million dollars in gains from people when they sell their homes, which I think is the biggest capital gains benefit we could give to most ordinary Americans. We also have capital gains now for people that invest in new small businesses and hold the investment for five years. It was part of our other economic plan. And these are things I think that will go a long way toward helping America build a stronger economy and a better tax system. I think the most important thing to emphasize, though, is that we also have to help people in other ways to build a strong economy and we can’t have any tax cut that’s not paid for. One of the big differences between Senator Dole and myself is that I told you how I’m going to pay for every penny of the tax cuts I recommend and we’ve worked hard to bring this deficit down and that’s helped people in the real estate business because the interest rates are lower. We’ve got home ownership at a 15-year high. We’ve got this country going in the right direction. So we can have a tax cut but my priority would be to help the families who need it with child rearing and education and buying a first-time home and helping for health care costs. So from your business, helping in buying a first-time home, exempting the capital gains on the sale of the home would be the most important things that you asked about. Thank you, Pamela.

Before Senator Dole left the Senate, he and Mr. Gingrich also were recommending that we pass these tax cuts only insofar as we could pay for them. We all assume that the tax cuts will be permanent. But we have to prove we can pay for them. After he left the senate, we abandoned that. That’s why most experts say that this tax scheme will blow a huge hole in the deficit, raise interest rates and weaken the economy and that will take away all the benefits of the tax cut with a weaker economy. That’s why we have to balance the budget, and I will tell you how I’m going to pay for anything I promise you, line by line. You should expect that from both of us.

I can only tell you that I don’t think Senator Dole is too old to be president. It’s the age of his ideas that I question. You’re almost not old enough to remember this. But we tried this before, promising people an election year tax cut that’s not paid for.

Tell him you can have everything you got. And so let me just say this. Did you hear him say that Congress just voted to increase student loans and scholarships? They did after he left. The last budget he led cut Pell Grants, cut student loans. I vetoed it when they shut the government down. My plan would give students a dollar-for-dollar reduction for the cost of a typical community college tuition. A $10,000 deduction a year for the cost of college tuition. We let families save in an IRA, withdraw tax free to pay for the cost of education and it’s all paid for. My whole administration is about your future. It’s about what the 21st century is going to be like for you. I hope you will look at the ideas in it. Thank you.

No, ma’am, I don’t. I am against quotas. I’m against giving anybody any kind of preference for something they’re not qualified for. But because I still believe that there is some discrimination and that not everybody has an opportunity to prove they’re qualified, I favor the right kind of Affirmative Action. I’ve done more to eliminate Affirmative Action programs I didn’t think were fair and tighten others up than my predecessors have, since affirmative action’s been around. But I have also worked hard to give people a chance to prove that they are qualified. Let me just give you some examples. We’ve doubled the number of loans from the small business administration, tripled the number of loans to women business people, no one unqualified, everybody had to meet the standards. We’ve opened 260,000 new jobs in the military to women since I’ve been president. But the joint chiefs say we’re stronger and more confident and solid than ever. Let me give you another example of what I mean. To me, Affirmative Action is making that extra effort. It’s sort of like what Senator Dole did when he sponsored the Americans with Disabilities Act and said to certain stores, okay, you have to make it accessible to people in wheelchairs. We weren’t guaranteeing anything, anybody anything except the chance to prove they were qualified, the chance to prove that they could do it. And that’s why I must say I agree with General Colin Powell that we’re not there yet. We ought to keep making those extra effort Affirmative Action programs, the law and the policy of the land.

I have never supported quotas. I’ve always been against them. I don’t favor equal results, but I do favor making sure everybody has a chance to prove they’re competent. The reason I have opposed that initiative is because I’m afraid it will end those extra effort programs. Again I say, think of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Make an effort to put a ramp up there so someone in a wheelchair can get up. You don’t guarantee they get the job. You guarantee they have a chance to prove they’re competent. And as I said, this is not a partisan thing with me. General Colin Powell said the same thing, he fears the initiative would take away the extra effort programs. No preferences to unqualified people, no quotas, but don’t give up on making an extra effort until you’re sure everybody has a chance to prove they’re qualified.

You know, one of the responsibilities of growing older, it seems to me, is being able to tell people something they may not want to hear just because it’s true. When they had a 250 billion dollar tax scheme, that is half the size of this one. This one is 550. They passed the budget. They have 270 billion dollars in Medicare cuts the first education cuts in history, cut environmental enforcement by 25 percent, took away the guarantee of quality standards in nursing homes, took away the guarantee of health care for folks with disabilities. Don’t take my word for this. The Economist magazine polled lots of economists, seven Nobel prize winners who said if this tax scheme passes, it will require huge cuts, 40 percent, in the environment and law enforcement and education. It will require bigger cuts in Medicare than I vetoed last time. My targeted tax cut is for child-rearing, buying a first-time home, paying for health care costs. And it’s paid for, and I’ll tell you how I’ll pay for it. He won’t tell you because he can’t.

Thank you, well, first let me say that I signed the Family Leave Act. It was my very first bill, and I’m very proud of it because it symbolizes what I think we ought to be doing. I don’t take credit for all the good things that have happened in America, but I take credit for what I’ve tried to do to work with others to make good things happen. Most important good things that happen in America happen in families. Just about every family I know, the main concern is how am I going to succeed at work and still do right by my children. Family medical leave has let 12 million families take a little time off for the birth of a child or a family illness without losing their job. I’d like to see it expanded in two ways. I’d like to say you can also take a little time off without losing your job to go to a regular parent-teacher conference or to go to a regular doctor’s appointment with a family member. I’d also like to see the overtime laws change so that we could have some more flex time so that at the discretion of the worker, the worker, if you earn overtime, you could decide when you want that time to be taken, in cash or in time with your family if you’ve got a family problem. I never go anywhere, it seems like, where I don’t meet somebody who has benefited from a Family Leave Law. In Longview, Texas the other day, I met a woman who was almost in tears because she had been able to keep her job while spending time with her husband who had cancer. One of the people who’s here with me today met a woman in the airport saying her son, Jess was able to be present at the birth of her child because of the Family Leave Law. So yes, I think it should be expanded. We have to help people succeed at home and at work.

I only have 30 seconds. I can’t fix the statistics. It covers the majority of the work force. Employers of under 50 are exempted. The bill originally covered employers of 25 and more, but because of opposition, we went up to 50. Senator Dole led the opposition to it. He filibustered it. He said it was a mistake. He said it would hurt the economy. We’ve had record numbers of new small businesses and 10 and a half million jobs. It didn’t hurt the economy. He still believes it’s a mistake. I believe it’s right. You can decide which of us you think are right. It’s up to you.

Let’s look at the facts. We lost a lot of manufacturing jobs in the 12 years before I became President. We’ve gained manufacturing jobs since I’ve been President. We’ve negotiated over 200 separate trade agreements. Let’s just take California. In California, we made 37 billion dollars’ worth of telecommunications equipment eligible for export for the first time. We’re selling everything from from — from telephones to CDs to rice in Japan. We’re selling American automobiles in Japan now. I visited a Chrysler dealership in Japan. We’re No.1 in automobile manufacturing production and sales around the world again, the first time since 1970s. Why? Because we’ve had tough aggressive trade policies, and because we’ve got interest rates down. We have a good, stable economic policy. Because we reduced the deficit four years in a row. For the first time in the 20th century the President has done that in all four years and that’s why I don’t want to see us blow a big hole in the deficit with a tax program we can’t pay for, so your interest rates will go up, and you’ll have to pay back in higher interest rates what you allegedly will get in a tax cut, so I say keep working on expanding the markets. More than half of these 10 and a half million new jobs are in higher wage areas and we’ll have more manufacturing and sales around the world.

I’m for it. That’s my policy. I’m for it. I believe that any law- abiding, tax-paying citizen who shows up in the morning and doesn’t break the law and doesn’t interfere with his or her neighbors ought to have the ability to work in our country and shouldn’t be subject to unfair discrimination. I’m for it. Now, I have a little time left so let me just say that I get attacked so many times on these questions; it’s hard to answer these things. Senator Dole just said we had the worst economy in the century. In February he said we had the best economy in Â 30 years, just February. And I don’t want to respond in kind to all these things. I could. I could answer a lot of these things tit for tat. But I hope we can talk about what we’re going to do in the future. No attack ever created a job or educated a child, or helped a family make ends meet. No insult ever cleaned up a toxic waste dump or helped an elderly person. Now, for four years that’s what I worked on. If you give me four years more I will work on it some more and I will try to answer these charges, but I prefer to emphasize direct answers to the future and I gave you a direct answer.

If you believe that the California economy was better in 1992 than it is today, you should vote for Bob Dole. I have worked so hard out here to help turn this economy around. Let me just give you one tiny example. In San Diego where we had some defense cutbacks, we funded a project for the University of California San Diego to use airplane composite materials to build lighter, stronger bridges, a little project in a program that Senator Dole opposed. And that composite now is going to be built around the bridges on the Santa Monica Freeway to help minimize the impact of earthquakes and create more jobs. That’s just one tiny example. Maybe we will talk about some more before it’s over.

I’m just curious. How many of you are under managed care plans? Raise your hand if you’re in managed care plan. How many of you like it?

Well, one of the things that I tried to do was to make sure that everybody in the country who was under a managed care plan should at least have three choices of plans, and would have the right to get out without penalty every year. Now that’s not a government takeover. That’s like the family of medical-leave law; it just tries to set the rules of the game. I’m strongly in favor of a federal bill to repeal any gag rules on providers. In other words, I believe that doctors should not be able to be kicked out of managed care plans just because they tell the patients what they need and what more expensive care options might be. If we’re saving money and managing resources better, that’s a good thing. If we’re saving money and depriving people of care, that’s a bad thing. A good place to start is to say no managed care provider can gag a doctor and kick the doctor out of the managed care plan for the doctor, telling the patient, you need a more expensive test, you need a more expensive procedure, your health requires it.

First of all, I think it’s important to make voting more accessible. That’s why I strongly supported the Motor Voter law. There was a big story I think in U.S.A. Today of the millions of people who have now registered because of it. Secondly, I think we need to look at making the elections more accessible. You know several states now are letting people vote over three weeks. A lot of people are busy and it’s hard for them to just get there and vote. Third thing I think we need is more forums like this, which is one of the reasons I have so strongly supported campaign finance reform. Because if you want to cut the cost of campaigns, you have to open the airways, because what drives the cost of campaigns are the cost of advertising on television, radio, newspaper, mass mailing. And if you open the airways to more things like this, you see it’s not just you that are participating here. For every one of you who stood up here and asked a question tonight, I promise you there’s a 100,000 Americans who said I wish I could have asked that question. So I think we have to change the nature of politics. The last thing I think we should do is something I have been trying to do since I have been president, is every time I do something in a public way, I try to have a real American citizen there who is directly affected by it so that people can see the connection of what happens way across the country, in Washington with more police on the street, in San Diego, clean up the sewage here in San Diego, doubling the border guards here in Southern California, that there is a connection between what we do way back there and what we do here. Those are my best ideas about it.

Let me make one other suggestion, because you’re a teacher, you can have an impact on that. One of the things I think that really frustrates people is that so often political campaigns seem to be more about the politicians that are running than the people. And there is a connection. And I think what we have to do is convince people there is a big difference, if you vote one way you will have a Department of Education in the 21st century, if you vote the other way, you won’t. If you vote one way you will have an expansion of family leave. If you vote the other way, you will be lucky to save it. But these are important questions. And people have to decide. I think that the American people also need to be a little more responsible and think about whether there’s a connection with their lives and what we do in Washington.

Iris, this is one where we have some agreement, I think. Only about half the people in this country have pension plans. And Social Security is not enough for a lot of people to live on, or at least is not enough for them to maintain anything like their previous lifestyle. So we’ve got to figure out how are we going to have more people with pension plans, and pension coverage has been declining as more and more people work for small businesses and fewer people work for big businesses. So what, what is in my plan and I think it’s almost identical in Senator Dole’s plans is we make more people eligible to save in an IRA and let couples, married couples save more and then they could withdraw from it tax-free if they needed to, for medical emergencies or buy a home or education, but they could also save to supplement retirement. In addition to that, we just passed a sweeping small business reform that makes it easier for small business people to take out 401 K plans for themselves and employees and much easier for employees to carry it from job to job. My best friend from grade school is a computer software salesman and he told me last time he changed employers it took him nine months to figure out how to transfer his 401K plan. Now none of that will happen anymore. I hope over the next ten years you will see a big increase over the percentage of people that have pension plans, plus a secure Social Security system.

Let me tell you what we have done. We have concluded with Japan 21 — about to be 22 — trade agreements now. And since we did that, in the areas where we concluded, trade agreements or exports to Japan have gone up by 85 percent in the last four years and our trade deficit with Japan has gone down. Until about five months ago the Japanese economy was in a deep recession. It’s coming back now, so they can buy even more American products, and I think it will go down more. But I’m very — that’s one of the real success stories here of the work we’ve done. We’re selling Japanese rice from California for the first time. I visited a Chrysler dealership in Tokyo. I visited a Jeep plant, oldest plant in America, a plant in Toledo, Ohio, where they’re going to export 41,000 right hand drive Jeeps this year, and they’ve got 700 new jobs because of it. There’s no easy way to do this when you’re dealing with an economy that’s traditionally been more closed than one that’s traditionally been more open. You have to gut it out, issue by issue by issue. We agreed in principle on an insurance agreement, and we’re working on three or four other areas now, but the way you have to do it is make sure you’re competitive. We’re the most competitive country in the world now, and then just fight to open those markets and go try to make the sale, and that’s what our trade ambassador our commerce secretary and all the other people in our administration are trying to do.

Let me say again, we’ve had over 200 separate trade agreements in the last four years. By far, the largest number in American history — not just the big ones you read about, but a lot of smaller ones. And now what we have to do is to focus on those things we’re real good at and make sure we’re getting a fair deal. We just had a pretty serious dispute with China because they were copying our CDs, and costing thousands of jobs in places like California. So we have — as we said, if you want to keep doing business and selling your products over here, you’re going to have to quit pirating our CDs, and they agreed to do things and verify that they had done it, which will make the problem much better. There is not a simple answer. You have to work on this day in and day out, every month ,every year, every issue, to make sure that we have not only free trade but fair trade. I’m proud that we’re better off on that than we were four years ago.

This is the most religious, great country in history. And yet, interestingly enough, we have the most religious freedom of any country in the world, including the freedom not to believe. And now we have all these people just up the road in Los Angeles County, we have people from 150 different racial and ethnic groups and tons of different religions, but the fundamental tenets of virtually every religion are the same, and what I try to do is to support policies that would respect religion and then help parents inculcate those values to their children. Let me very briefly give you some examples. One of my proudest moments was signing the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, that says the government has got to bend over backwards before we interfere with religious practice. So I changed the Justice Department’s effort to get a church to pay back a man tithe, because he was bankrupt when he gave it. I have supported character education programs in our schools, drug-free schools programs. I supported giving parents a V-chip on their television so if they don’t want their young kids to watch things they shouldn’t watch, they wouldn’t have to. That is the kind of thing we have to do, give people like you and our families the power to give those values to our children.

I want to answer your question, but let me say one other thing. We don’t need a constitutional amendment for kids to pray, and what I did was to have the justice department and the education department for the first time ever issue a set of guidelines that we gave to every school in America, saying that children could not be interfered with in religious advocacy when they were praying, when they were doing whatever they could do under the constitution, just because they were on a public school ground, and I think anyone who’s experienced this will tell you that our administration has done more than any in years to clarify the freedom of religion in the public square, including in the public schools. Now, I think I have to let Senator Dole speak for himself. It wouldn’t be fair for me to do that. I would wind up — I mean, it’s the last question and I would mischaracterize it to try to make you happy. Let me tell you what I feel. We have a lot of differences in our country, and some of us believe that other people’s decisions are wrong, even immoral. But under our constitution, if you show up tomorrow and obey the law, and you work hard and you do what you’re supposed to do, you are entitled to equal treatment. That’s the way the system works. All over the world, people are being torn apart — Bosnia, the Middle East, Northern Ireland, Rwanda, Burundi — you name it — because of all their differences. We still have some of that hatred inside us. You see it in the church burnings. And one of the things I’ve tried hardest to do is to tell the American people that we have to get beyond that, we have to understand that we’re stronger when we unite around shared values instead of being divided by our differences.

Let me say again, there is no more important responsibility for the president than to say if you believe in the constitution, the Bill of Rights, and the Declaration of Independence, that’s all we need to know. And you can be part of our America and you can walk across that bridge to the 21st century with us. And we are not well served when we attack each other in a kind of ad hominem way. It doesn’t create jobs. It doesn’t educate children. It doesn’t solve problems. We need to be disagreeing on ideas, honestly, and talking about the future. The future will be the greatest time in this country’s history if we can beat this division that is bedeviling the whole rest of the world.

Thank you, Jim. And thank you, ladies and gentlemen, and all the people who are watching. One thing I would like to say is I agree with what Senator Dole said. It’s a remarkable thing in a country like ours, a man who grew up in Russell, Kansas, and one who was born to a widowed mother in Hope, Arkansas, could wind up running for president. Could have a chance to serve as president. First thing I want to say is thank you for giving me the chance to be president. This election is about two different visions about how we should go into the 21st Century. Would we be better off as I believe, working together to give each other the tools we need to make the most of our God-given potential, or are we better off saying, you’re on your own? Would we be better off building that bridge to the future together so we can all walk across it or saying you can get across yourself? If you don’t agree — leave this room with anything else tonight and if the people watching us don’t leave with anything else, I hope you will leave with this. This is a real important election. The world is changing dramatically in how we work and how we live, how we relate to each other, huge changes. And the decisions we make will have enormous practical consequences. So we’ve talked about our responsibility tonight. I want to talk about your responsibility, and your responsibility. Your responsibility is to show up on November the 5th. Because you’re going to decide whether we’re going to balance the budget now, but protect Medicare, Medicaid, education and the environment. You will decide whether we’re going to keep fighting crime with a Brady Bill, assault weapons and finish putting those 100,000 police. Whether we’re going to move a million people from welfare to work. Whether we’re going to give our families more protection for their kids against drugs and tobacco and gangs and guns. Whether we’re going to give our children a world-class education. Where every eight-year-old can read. Every 12-year-old can log in on the Internet. Every 18-year-old can go to college. If we do those things we will build that bridge to the 21st Century and the greatest country in history will be even greater. Thank you.
