I think we’ve seen a deterioration of values. I think for a while as a nation we condoned those things we should have condemned. For a while, as I recall, it even seems to me that there was talk of legalizing or decriminalizing marijuana and other drugs, and I think that’s all wrong. So we’ve seen a deterioration in values, and one of the things that I think we should do about it in terms of cause is to instill values into the young people in our schools. We got away, we got into this feeling that value- free education was the thing. And I don’t believe that at all I do believe there are fundamental rights and wrongs as far as use. And, of course, as far as the how we make it better, yes, we can do better on interdiction. But we’ve got to do a lot better on education, and we have to do, be tougher on those who commit crimes. We’ve got to get after the users more. We have to change this whole culture. You know, I saw a movie – “Crocodile Dundee.” And I saw the cocaine scene treated with humor, as though this was a humorous little incident. And it’s bad. Everybody ought to be in this thing. Entertainment industry, people involved in the schools, education. And it isn’t a Republican or a Democrat or a liberal problem. But we have got to instill values in these young people. And I have put forward a many-point drug program that includes what I would do as president of the United States; in terms of doing better on interdiction; and in terms of better in the neighborhoods. But I think we’re all in this together, and my plea to the American people is values in the schools.

Well, the other day my opponent was given a briefing by the CIA. I asked for and received the same briefing. I am very careful in public life about dealing with classified information. And what I’m about to say is unclassified. Seven administrations were dealing with Mr. Noriega. It was the Reagan-Bush administration that brought this man to justice. And as the governor of Massachusetts knows, there was no evidence that governor – that Mr. Noriega was involved in drugs, no hard evidence until we indicted him. And so I think it’s about time we get this Noriega matter in perspective. Panama is a friendly country. I went down there and talked to the president of Panama about cleaning up their money laundering, and Mr. Noriega was there, but there was no evidence at that time, and when the evidence was there, we indicted him. And we want to bring him to justice. And so call off all those pickets out there that are trying to tear down seven different administrations.

Is this the time to unleash our one-liners? That answer was about as clear as Boston harbor.

(Laughter)

Let me help the governor. There are so many things there, I don’t quite know where to begin. When you cut capital gains, you put people to work. John Kennedy proposed cutting capital gains. Paul Tsongas, a liberal senator from Massachusetts said the dumbest thing I did was to oppose the capital gains cut. It’s not going to cost the government money. It’s going to increase revenues to the federal government, and it’s going to create jobs. So that’s one of the things that I think makes a big difference between us. Massachusetts doesn’t have an enormous defense budget, but nevertheless, the governor raised taxes five different times. That happens to be a fact. And so let’s kind of stay on the issue, and I have made a specific proposal for what I call a flexible freeze. And it permits – economists on the East Coast and West think it’s good – it permits the president to sort out the priorities, and we continue to grow because I will not raise taxes.

I think it’s the Republican Party and my concern to bring it down. And presidential leadership that I want to provide in this area will bring it down, but we’ve got to get the Democrats – Congress under control. They do all the spending, they appropriate every dime and tell us how to spend every dime. I’d like to ask the Governor to join in getting for the president what 43 governors have, the line-item veto. He has to operate in Massachusetts under a balanced budget proviso. I would like a balanced budget amendment. But the dynamics of the economy – we cut the taxes and revenues are up by 25 percent in three years. So the problem is – it’s not that the working is being taxed too little or the person working out – the woman working in some factory being taxed too little. It is that we are continuing to spend too much. So, my formula says grow at the rate of inflation. Permit the president to set the priorities on where we do the spending. And remember the Federal deficit has come down $70 billion in one year, in 1987. And if we – and the – actually this year Congress is doing a little better in controlling the growth of spending. Spending was only up something like 4 percent. So, it isn’t that we’re taking too little – from taxpayer – we’re spending too much still. And the formula I’ve given you works, we’ve put it through a good economic model, we’ve got good economists on the West Coast, Michael Boskin and Marty Feldstein up there who’s a very respected economist in the – Massachusetts. And they agree, that if we can do what I’ve said, we can get it down without going and socking the American taxpayer once again. Capital gains, one more point on that, please let’s learn from history. A capital gains differential will increase jobs, increase risk taking, increase revenues to the Federal Government.

One thing I will not do is sock every business in the country and, thus, throw some people out of work. I want to keep this economic recovery going. More Americans at work today than any time in history, a greater percentage of the work force. What I will do is permit people to buy into Medicaid. I believe that’s the answer. I am proud to have been part of an administration that past the first catastrophic health bill. And in that there are some Medicaid provisions that will be very helpful to the very kind of people we’re talking about here. But we’ve got to keep going forward without killing off the engine and throwing people out of work. So, the answer lies, it seems to me, in full enforcement of the catastrophic program. It lies to me in flexibility in Medicaid so people at the lowest end can buy in there and get their needs covered and then it also – I do not want to see us mandate across the board that every company has to do this, because I really think that marginal operators are going to go say, “We can’t make it.” And I think then you’re going to see that people are put out of work. All these programs – and this cost on his – is – was – I saw an estimate, I’d love to know what he thinks, $35 – $40 billion – and it seems to me that somebody pays that. There isn’t any such thing as something free out there. It either gets passed along as increased prices or it gets passed along by people being put out of work so the business can continue to compete. So, I think we ought to do it in the Medicaid system. I think we ought to do it by full enforcement of the catastrophic health insurance. I think we ought to do it by everybody doing what they can do out of conscience. It’s a terrible problems in terms of flexibility on private insurance. But I just don’t want to mandate it and risk putting this – setting the recovery back.

You don’t like the answer, but it’s an answer.

Well, we’re on the right track. The NIH is doing a good job in research. The Surgeon General is doing a good job in encouraging the proper kind of education. I notice that the Governor did not mention any testing. But we got to have a knowledge base. Testing should be confidential, but we have to have a knowledge. We can’t simply stick our heads in the sands in terms of testing. I’m Chairman of the President’s Task Force on Regulatory Relief and we are working with the FDA and they have sped up bringing drugs to market that can help. And you got to be careful here, because there’s a safety factor, but I think these things – and then also I am one who believes we’ve got to go the extra mile in clean – being sure that that blood supply is pure. We cannot have a lack of confidence in the blood supply when it comes to operations and surgery and things of this nature. So, research, speeding the drugs to market, testing, blood supply are very important elements of this.

Well, I don’t question his passion. I question – and I don’t question his concern about the war in Vietnam. He introduced or supported legislation back then that suggested that kids of Massachusetts should be exempt from going overseas in that war. Now, that’s a certain passion that in my view it’s misguided passion. He – we have a big difference on issues. You see, last year in the primary, he expressed his passion. He said, “I am a strong liberal Democrat” – August, ’87. Then he said, “I am a card-carrying member of the ACLU.” That was what he said. He is out there on out of the mainstream. He is very passionate. My argument with the governor is, do we want this country to go that far left. And I wish we had time to let me explain. But I salute him for his passion. We just have a big difference on where this country should be led, and in what direction it ought to go.

(Applause)

Nothings wrong with it. But just take a look at the positions of the ACLU. But, Peter, please understand, the liberals do not like me talking about liberal They don’t like it when I say that he says he’s a card carrying member. Now, if that quote was wrong, he can repudiate it, right here. I’ve seen it authoritatively written twice, and if I’ve done him an injustice, and he didn’t say it, I’m very, very sorry. But I don’t agree with a lot of – most of the positions of the ACLU. I simply don’t want to see the ratings on movies. I don’t want my ten year old grandchild to go into an X-rated movie. I like those ratings systems. I don’t think they’re right to try to take the tax exemption away from the Catholic Church. I don’t want to see the kiddie pornographic laws repealed; I don’t want to see “under God” come out from our currency. Now, these are all positions of the ACLU. And I don’t agree with them. He has every right to exercise his passion, as what he said, a strong, progressive liberal. I don’t agree with that. I come from a different point. And I think I’m more in touch with the mainstream of America. They raised the same thing with me on the Pledge of Allegiance. You see, I’d have found a way to sign that bill. Governor Thompson of Illinois did. I’m not questioning his patriotism. He goes out and says the man is questioning my patriotism. And then all the liberal columnists join in. I am not. I am questioning his judgment on these matters, or where he’s coming from He has every right to do it. But I believe that’s not what the American people want, and when he said, when he said at the convention, ideology doesn’t matter, just competence, he was moving away from his own record, from what his passion has been over the years. And that’s all I’m trying to do, is put it in focus. And I hope people don’t think that I’m questioning his patriotism when I say he used his words to describe his participation in that organization.

I want to see the McKinney Act fully funded. I believe that that would help in terms of shelter. I want to see – when I talked at our convention about a thousand points of light, I was talking about the enormous numbers of shelters and organizations that help. The governor’s wife has been very active in the homeless. My campaign chairman, Secretary Jim Baker’s wife. This isn’t government. These are people that care, that are trying to give of themselves. The government has a role. It is to fully fund the McKinney Act. There are certain army bases that the act calls for that can be used in certain cases to shelter people when it’s rough. And so I think that we’re on the right track. I don’t see this, incidentally, as a Democrat or a Republican or a liberal or conservative idea. I see an involvement by a thousand points of light. I see the funding that is required, and I hope the Congress will fully fund this bill. They gave it a great deal of conscience and a great deal of work. And we’re on the track on this one. But – and I, look, mental – that was a little overstated it. I’d say around 30 percent. And I think maybe we could look back over our shoulders and wonder whether it was right to let all those mental patients out. Maybe we need to do a better job in mental clinics to help them. Because there is a major problem there. A lot of them are mentally sick. And we’ve got to attend to them. But fully, my short range answer is fully fund that McKinney Act.

I think the governor is blurring housing and the homeless. Let’s talk about housing which the question was. When you talk to those bankers, did they discuss where interest rates were when your party controlled the White House? Ten days before I took the oath of office as president they were 21 and a half percent. Now, how does that grab you for increasing housing? Housing is up. We are serving a million more families now. But we’re not going to do it in that old Democratic, liberal way of trying to build more bricks and mortars. Go out and take a look at St. Louis at some of that effort. It is wrong. I favor home ownership. I want to see more vouchers. I want to see control of some of these projects, and I want to keep the interest rates down. They’re half, now of what they were when we came into office, and with my policy of getting this deficit under control, they’ll be a lot less. But if we spend and spend and spend, that is going to wrap up the housing market, and we’ll go right back to the days of the misery index and malaise that President Reagan and I have overcome – thank God for the United States on that one.

Well, the Massachusetts furlough program was unique. It was the only one in the nation that furloughed murderers who had not served enough time to be eligible for parole. The federal program doesn’t do that. No other state programs do that. And I favor the death penalty. I know it’s tough and honest people can disagree. But when a narcotics wrapped up guy goes in and murders a police officer, I think they ought to pay with their life. And I do believe it would be inhibiting. And so I am not going to furlough men like Willie Horton, and I would meet with their, the victims of his last escapade, the rape and the brutalization of the family down there in Maryland. Maryland would not extradite Willie Horton, the man who was furloughed, the murderer, because they didn’t want him to be furloughed again. And so we have a fundamental difference on this one. And I think most people know my position on the sanctity of life. I favor adoption. I do not favor abortion.

I haven’t sorted out the penalties. But I do know, I do know that I oppose abortion. And I favor adoption. And if we can get this law changed, everybody should make the extraordinary effort to take these kids that are unwanted and sometimes aborted, take the – let them come to birth, and then put them in a family where they will be loved. And you see, yes, my position has evolved. And it’s continuing to evolve, and it’s evolving in favor of life. And I have had a couple of exceptions that I support – rape, incest and the life of the mother. Sometimes people feel a little uncomfortable talking about this, but it’s much clearer for me now. As I’ve seen abortions sometimes used as a birth control device, for heavens sakes. See the millions of these killings accumulate, and this is one where you can have an honest difference of opinion. We certainly do. But no, I’m for the sanctity of life, and once that illegality is established, then we can come to grips with the penalty side, and of course there’s got to be some penalties to enforce the law, whatever they may be.

I just –

One of the reasons, and I first would like to know which programs you’re talking about, and then we could talk on the merits of the programs. But, you see, my fundamental philosophy is give local and state government as much control as possible. That might be the explanation, if you tell me the program. I do strongly support the WIC program. I think it is good. I think part of the answer to this haunting of these children that are out there and suffering lies in extension of Medicaid, to challenge the states, and maybe we’re going to have to enforce more on the states in terms of Medicaid taking care of these. But, Peter, so much of it is, gets into a whole other phase of things. The neighborhood, the kind of environment people are growing up in, and that leads me to the programs I’m talking about in terms of education. I think that part of it is the crime infested neighborhoods, and that’s why I’m a strong believer in trying to control crimes in the neighborhood, why I was so pleased to be endorsed by the policemen on the beat, the Boston Police Department the other day. I think they understand my commitment to helping them in the neighborhoods. And so it’s a combination of these things. But do not erode out of the system the thousand points of light. The people that are out there trying to help these kids, the programs like cities and schools, the work that Barbara Bush is doing so people can learn to read in this country and then go on and break this cycle of poverty. I’m for Head Start and moving that up. And I’ve already made a proposal – and yes, it will cost some money. But I favor that. So these are the combination of things I want, and the fact that I don’t think the federal government can endorse a $35 billion program does not mean I have less compassion than the person who endorses such a program.

What troubles me is that when I talk of the voluntary sector and a thousand points of light and a thousand different ways to help on these problems, the man has just said he doesn’t understand what I’m talking about.

This is the problem I have with the big spending liberals. They think the only way to do it is for the federal government to do it all. The fact happens to be that education spending is up by the federal government; it is up. It is not down.

But here’s the point he misses. The federal government spends seven percent of the total on education, and the rest of the state governments and local governments and the thousand points of lightened I’m talking about private schools and private church schools and things of this nature–are putting up 93 percent.

But the federal spending for education is up, and I want to be the education president, because I want to see us do better. We’re putting more money per child into education, and we are not performing as we should. We’ve gotten away fro values and the fundamentals. And I would like to urge the school superintendents and the others around the country to stand up now and keep us moving forward on a path towards real excellence.

And we can do it. But itÏ€s not going to be dedicated by some federal bureaucracy in Washington, D.C.

Well, I thought the question was about defense. The governor was for a nuclear freeze that would have locked in a thousand Soviet intermediate nuclear force weapons and zero for the West. And because we didn’t listen to the freeze advocates, and strengthen the defense of this country, we now have the first arms control agreement in the nuclear age. Now, we’re sitting down and talking to the Soviets about strategic arms, and he wants to do away with the Midgetman and the MX, the modernization or our nuclear capability. That is not the way you deal with the Soviets. I’ve met Mr. Gorbachev. Met Mr. Shevardnadze and talked substance with him the other day. These people are tough. But now we have a chance. I few have experience and now how to handle it, but please do not go back to the days when the military was as weak as they could be, when the morale was down, and when we were the laughing stock around the world.

And now we are back, because we have strengthened the defenses of this country, and believe me, I don’t want to see us return to those days.

As to Ferdinand Marcos, he isn’t there any more. It was under our administration that Mrs. Aquino came in. But I’ll tell you what I was thinking of. I flew a combat mission, my last one was over Manila. And he was down there fighting against imperialism. And he had just-

And he just lifted martial law. And he just called for new elections. And all of those things happened because the Philippines do crave democracy. And out he goes.

I don’t think it’s a question of eliminating. I can tell him some I’m against. A-6F, for example. DIVAD. And I can go on and on. Minuteman III, penetration systems. I mean, there’s plenty of them that I oppose, but what I am not going to do, when we are negotiating with the Soviet Union, sitting down talking to Mr. Gorbachev about how we achieve a 50 percent reduction in our strategic weapons, I’m not going to give away a couple of aces I that very tough card game. I’m simply not going to do that.

And under me, when I lead this country, the secretary of defense is going to have to make the choices, between how we keep, how we protect the survivability of our nuclear deployment on the Midgetman missile, or on the Minuteman, whatever it is. We’re going to have to-the MX. We’re going to have to do that. It’s Christmas.

(Laughter)

Wouldn’t it be nice to be perfect?

wouldn’t it be nice to be the ice man so you never make a mistake? These are the-my answer is do not make these unilateral cuts, and everybody now realizes that peace through strength works, and so this is where I have a big difference.

Of course we’re going to have to make some determination on this, and we’re going to have to make it on the convention forces. But now we’ve got a very good concept called competitive strategies. We will do what we do best. It’s a strategy that we’ve been working on for a couple of years. It is going to take us to much better advantage in conventional forces.

But look, let me sum it up. I want to be the president that gets conventional forces balance. I want to be the one to banish chemical and biological weapons from the face of the earth. But you have to have a little bit of experience to know where to start. And I think I’ve had that.

What I think we ought to do is take a look at perestroika and glasnost, welcome them, but keep our eyes open. Be cautious. Because the Soviet change is not fully established yet. Yes, I think it’s fine to do business with them. And, so, I’m encouraged with what I see when I talk to Mr. — what I hear when I talk to Mr. Gorbachev and Mr. Shevardnadze, but can they pull it off.

And when they have a –they a –deals that are good for us, as China started to do–the changes in China since Barbara and I lived there is absolutely amazing, in terms of incentive, in partnership and things of this nature. And now the Soviet Union seems to be walking down that same path. We should encourage that. We ought to say this is good.

But where I differ with my opponent is I am not going to make unilateral cuts in our strategic defend systems or support some freeze when they have superiority. I’m not going to do that, because I think the jury is still out on the Soviet experiment.

And the interesting place-one of the things that fascinates me about this perestroika and glasnost is wheats going to happen in Eastern Europe. You see the turmoil in Poland today. And I think we have enormous opportunity for trade. I don’t want to go back to the Carter grain embargo on the Soviets. We are once again reliable suppliers and I would never use food as a political tool like our predecessors did. But this is an exciting time. But all I’m suggesting is let’s not be naÃ¯ve in dealing with the Soviets and make a lot of unilateral cuts hoping against hope that they will match our bid.

Look at the INF treaty. And if we haven’t learned from the negotiating history on that, we’ll never learn. The freeze people were wrong. The Reagan-Bush administration was right.

I’m not reconsidering my position. Two questions: How do you deter nuclear attack without modernizing our nuclear forces when the Soviets are modernizing and how come you spend-willing to spend a dime on something that you consider a fantasy and a fraud. Those are two hypo-rhetorical questions.

He is the man on conventional forces that wants to eliminate two carrier battle groups. The armed forces, the conventional forces of the United States have never been more ready. Every single one of the Joint Chiefs will testify to the fact that readiness is in an historic high. And secondly, in terms of the cutting of the Coast Guard, the Democratic controlled Congress, so please help us with that, who cut $70 million from the Coast Guard out of the interdiction effort on narcotics.

(Applause)

He’s got to get this thing more clear. Why do you spend a billion dollars on something you think is a fantasy and a fraud? I will fully research it, go forward as fast as we can. We’ve set up the levels of funding and when it is deployable, I will deploy it. That is my position on SDI and it’s never wavered a bit.

I wrote the anti-terrorist report for this government. It is the best anti-terrorist report written. Yes, we shouldn’t trade arms for hostages. But we have made vast improvements in our anti-terrorism. Now, it’s fine to say that sometimes you have to hit base camps, but when the president saw this state sponsored-fingerprints of Muammar Khadaffi on the loss of American life, he hit Libya. And my opponent was unwilling to support that action.

And since that action, terrorist action against the United States citizens have gone down.

And I have long ago said I supported the president on this other matter. And I’ve said mistakes were made. Clearly nobody’s going to think the president started out thinking he was going to trade arms for hostages. That is a very serious charge against the president. The matter has been thoroughly looked into. But the point is sometimes the action-

(Laughter)

– has to be taken by the Federal Government and when we took action, it had a favorable response.

You’re judged by the whole record. You’re judged by the entire record. Are we closer to peace? Are we doing better in anti-terrorism? Should we have listened to my opponent who wanted to send the UN into the Persian Gulf or in spite of the mistakes of the past, are we doing better there? How is our credibility with the GCC countries on the Western side of the Gulf. Is Iran talking to Iraq about peace? You judge on the record. Are the Soviets coming out of Afghanistan? How does it look in a program he called or some one of these marvelous Boston adjective up there and-about Angola-now, we have a chance-several Bostonians don’t like it, but the rest of the country will understand.

(Applause)

Now we have a chance. Now we have a chance. And, so, I think that I’d leave it right there and say that you judge on the whole record. And let me say this-all he can talk about-he goes around ranting about Noriega. Now, I’ve told you what the intelligence briefing he received said about that. He can talk about Iran/Contra and also-I’ll make a deal with you, I will take the blame for those two incidents if you give me half the credit for all the good things that have happened in world peace since Ronald Reagan and I took over from the Carter administration.

(Applause)

I still have a couple of minutes left. And there is a difference principle –

It’s only on yellow here. Wait a minute.

(Laughter)

Jim –

I said I wasn’t perfect. Where was I?

I finished.

I see a young man that was elected to the Senate twice, to the House of Representatives twice. I see a man who is young and I am putting my confidence in a whole generation of people that are in their 30Ï€s and 40Ï€s. I see a man that took the leadership in the Job Training Partnership Act and that retrains people in this highly competitive changing society we’re in, so if a person loses his hob he is retrained for a benefit-for a-work that will be productive and he won’t have to go on one of these many programs that the liberal-talking about.

I see a young man who is a knowledgeable-in defense and there are three people on our ticket that are knowledgeable-in the whole-in the race-knowledgeable in defense and Dan Quayle is one of them and I am one of them. And I believe that he will be outstanding. And he took a tremendous pounding and everybody now knows that he took a very unfair pounding. And I’d like each person to say did I jump to conclusions running down rumors that were so outrageous and so brutal. And he’s kept his head up. And he will do very very well. And he has my full confidence and he’ll have the confidence of people that are in their 30Ï€s and 40Ï€s and more. So, judge the man on his record not on the-lot of rumors and innuendo and trying to fool around with his name.

My opponent says J. Danforth Quayle. Do you know who J. Danforth was, he was a man who gave his life in World War II, so ridiculing a person’s name is a little beneath this process. And he’ll do very well when we get into the debates.

(Applause)

Just the facts.

No, I think the debate ought to be between you and Lloyd.

Well, I-we obviously have a difference. I believe it does meet the test. We’ll have an opportunity to see the two of them in action in a friendly forum, wonderful friendly fashion like this.

(Laughter)

I had hoped this had been a little friendlier evening. I wanted to hitchhike a ride home in his tank with him. But now we’ve got the lines too carefully drawn here. But you talk about judgment. I mean, what kind of judgment-I mean, jumping all over the president on his decision on one area of farm policy. What kind of judgment sense has your chief education adviser now in jail in Massachusetts? I mean, there’s-I don’t think this is a fair argument. But nevertheless, I support my nominee for Vice President and he’ll do an outstanding job.

I oppose supply management and production controls. I support the farm bill, the 1985 farm bill and spending is moving in the right direction. I want to expand our markets abroad and that’s why I’ve called for that first economic summit to be on agriculture.

I will not go back to the way the Democrats did it and used food as a political weapon and throw a grain embargo on the farmers in this country. I want to see rural redevelopment and I have been out front in favor of alternate sources of energy and one of them is gasohol and comes from using your corn and I think we can do better in terms of biodegradable for a lot of product, so I’m optimistic about the agricultural economy.

In terms of the Third World, I support the Baker plan. I want to see market economies spring up all around the world and to the degree they do, we are succeeding. And I don’t want to see the banks let off the hook. I would oppose that, but I think were on the right track in agriculture and I am very very encouraged. But let’s not go back to that-what they call supply management and production control, that’ll simply price us out of the international market. Let’s try to expand our markets abroad.

I talked in New Orleans about a gentler and kinder nation and I have made specific proposals on education and the environment and on ethics and energy and how we do better in battling crime in our country. But there are two main focal points of this election. Opportunity and peace.

I want to keep this expansion going. Yes, we want change but we are the change. I am the change. I don’t want to go back to malaise and misery index. And, so, opportunity. Keep America at work. The best poverty program is a job with dignity in the private sector. And in terms of peace, we are on the right track. We’ve achieved an arms control agreement that our critics thought was never possible and I want to build on it. I want to see us finalize that START agreement and I want it to be the one to finally lead the world to banishing chemical and biological weapons.

I want to see asymmetrical reductions in conventional forces. And then it gets down to a question of values. We’ve had a chance to spell out our differences on the Pledge of Allegiance here tonight and on tough sentencing of drug king pins and this kind of thing. And I do favor the death penalty. And we’ve got a wide array of differences on those. But in the final analysis-in the final analysis, the person goes into that voting booth, they’re going to say, â‰¥Who has the values I believe in? Who has the experience that we trust? Who has the integrity and stability to get the job done?â‰¤ My fellow Americans, I am that man and I ask for your support. Thank you very much.

(Applause)
