I don’t believe that uh that Mr. Carter’s been any more specific in this case than he has been on many other instances. I notice particularly that he didn’t endorse the Humphrey-Hawkins bill which he has on occasions and which is included as a part of the Democratic platform. That legislation uh allegedly would help our unemployment, but uh – we all know that it would’ve controlled our economy, it would’ve added uh – ten to thirty billion dollars each year in additional expenditures by the Federal Government. It would’ve called for export controls on agricultural products In my judgment the best way to get jobs is to uh – expand the private sector, where five out of six jobs today exist in our economy. We can do that by reducing Federal taxes as I proposed uh – about a year ago when I called for a tax reduction of $28 billion – three-quarters of it to go to private uh taxpayers and uh one-quarter to the business sector. We could add to jobs in the major metropolitan areas by a proposal that I recommended that would give tax incentives to business to move into the inner city and to expand or to build new plants so that they would take a plant, or expand a plant where people are, and people are currently unemployed. We could uh – also uh – help our youths with some of the proposals that uh – would give to young people an opportunity to work and learn at the same time just like we give money to young people who are going to college. Those are the kind of specifics that I think we have to discuss on these uh – debates, and these are the kind of programs that I’ll talk about on my time.

At the time, Mr. Gannon, that I made the recommendation for a $28 billion tax cut – three-quarters of it to go to individual taxpayers and 25 percent to American business. I said at the time that we had to hold the lid an federal spending, that for every dollar of a tax reduction we had to have an equal reduction in federal expenditures – a one-for-one proposition. And I recommended that to the Congress with a budget ceiling of three hundred and ninety-five billion dollars, and that would have permitted us to have a $25 billion tax reduction. In my tax reduction program for middle-income taxpayers, I recommended that the Congress increase personal exemptions from seven hundred and fifty dollars per person to one thousand dollars per person. That would mean, of course, that for a family of four that that family would have a thousand dollars more personal exemption – money that they could spend for their own purposes, money that the government wouldn’t have to spend. But if we keep the lid on federal spending, which I think we can – with the help of the Congress, we can justify fully a $28 billion tax reduction. In the budget that I submitted to the Congress in January this year, I re- recommended a 50 percent cutback in the rate of growth of federal spending. For the last ten years the budget of the United States has grown from uh – about 11 percent per year. We can’t afford that kind of growth in federal spending. And in the budget that I recommended we cut it in half – a growth rate of 5 to 5 and one-half percent. With that kind of limitation, on federal spending, we can fully justify the tax reductions that I have proposed. And it seems to me with the stimulant of more money in the hands of the taxpayers, and with more money in the hands of business to expand, to modernize, to provide more jobs, our economy stimulated so that we’ll get more revenue and we’ll have a more prosperous economy.

That tax bill does not entirely meet the criteria that I established. I think the Congress should have uh – added another $10 billion reduction in personal income taxes, including the increase of personal exemptions from seven hundred and fifty to a thousand dollars. And Congress could have done that if the budget committees of the Congress, and the Congress as a whole, had not increased the spending that I recommended in the budget. I’m sure that you know that in the resolutions passed by the Congress, that have added about $17 billion in more spending, by the Congress over the budget that I recommended. So I would prefer in that tax bill to have an additional tax cut and a further limitation on federal spending. Now this tax bill – that hasn’t reached the White House yet, but is expected in a day or two – it’s about fifteen hundred pages. It has some good provisions in it. It has – uh left out some that I have recommended, unfortunately. On the other hand, uh when you have a bill of that magnitude, with – tho- those many provisions, a president has to sit and decide if there’s more good than bad. And from the a- analysis that I’ve made so far, it seems to me that that tax bill does uh – justify my signature and my approval.

If it is uh true that there will be a $60 billion surplus by fiscal year 1981, rather than spend that money for all the new programs that Governor Carter recommends and endorses, and which are included in the Democratic platform, I think the American taxpayer ought to get an additional tax break – a tax reduction of that magnitude. I feel that the taxpayers are the ones that need the relief: I don’t think we should add additional programs of the magnitude that Governor Carter talks about. It seems to me that our tax structure today has rates that are too high. But I am uh – very glad to point out that since 1969, during a Republican administrations, we have had ten million people taken off of the tax rolls at the lower end of the taxpayer area. And at the same time, assuming that I sign the tax bill that was mentioned by Mr. Gannon, we will in the last two tax bills have increased the minimum tax on all wealthy taxpayers. And I believe that by eliminating ten million taxpayers in the last uh eight years, and by putting a heavier tax burden on those in the higher tax brackets, plus the other actions that’ve been taken uh – we can give taxpayers adequate tax relief. Now it seems to me that uh – as we look at the recommendations of the budget committees and our own projections, there isn’t going to be any $60 billion dividend. I’ve heard of those dividends in the past; it always happens. We expected one at the time of the Vietnam War, but it was used up before we ever ended the war and taxpayers never got the adequate relief they deserved.

The amnesty program that I recommended in Chicago in September of 1974 would give to all draft evaders and – uh military deserters the opportunity to earn their uh – good record back. About fourteen to fifteen thousand did take advantage of that program. We gave them ample time. I am against- an across-the-board pardon of draft evaders or military deserters. Now in the case of Mr. Nixon, the reason the – the pardon was given, was that, when I took office this country was in a very, very divided condition. There was hatred, there was divisiveness – uh people had lost faith in their government in many, many respects. Mr. Nixon resigned, and I became president. It seemed to me that if I was to uh adequately and effectively handle the problems of high inflation, a growing recession, the uh – involvement of the United States still in Vietnam that I had to give a hundred percent of my time to those two major problems. Mr. Nixon resigned. That is disgrace. The first President out of thirty-eight that ever resigned from public office under pressure. So when you look at the penalty that he paid, and when you analyze the requirements that I had – to spend all of my time working on the economy, which was in trouble, that I inherited; working on our problems in Southeast Asia – which were still plaguing us – it seemed to me that Mr. Nixon had been penalized enough by his resignation in disgrace and the need, and necessity for me to concentrate on the problems of the country fully justified the action that I took.

Well, Mr. Carter has uh indicated that uh – he would give a blanket pardon to all uh – draft evaders. I do not agree with that point of view. I gave, in September of 1974, an opportunity for all draft evaders, all deserters, to come in voluntarily, clear their records by earning an opportunity to restore their good citizenship. I think we gave them a good opportunity – we’re – I don’t think we should go any further.

I think the record should show, Mr. Newman, that uh – the Bureau of Census – we checked it just yesterday – indicates that uh – in the four years that uh – Governor Carter was governor of the state of Georgia, uh – expenditures by the government went up over 50 percent Uh – employees of the government in Georgia during his term of office went up over 25 percent; and the figures also show that the uh, uh – bonded indebtedness of the state of Georgia during his governorship went up over 20 percent. And there was some very interesting testimony given by Governor Carter’s successor, Governor Busby, before a Senate committee a few uh – months ago on how he found the Medicaid program when he came into office following Governor Carter. He testified, and these are his words – the present governor of Georgia – he says he found the Medicaid program in Georgia in shambles. Now let me talk about what we’ve done in the White House as far as federal employees are concerned The first order that I issued after I became president was to cut or eliminate the prospective forty-thousand increase in federal employees that had been scheduled by my predecessor. And in the term that I’ve been president – some two years – we have reduced federal employment by eleven thousand. In the White House staff itself, when I became president, we had roughly five hundred and forty employees. We now have about four hundred and eighty-five employees, so we’ve made a rather significant reduction in the number of employees on the White House staff working for the president. So I think our record of cutting back employees, plus the failure on the part of the Governor’s programs to actually save employment in Georgia, shows which is the better plan.

Well, in the uh – last two years, as I indicated before, we had a very tough time. We were faced with uh – heavy inflation, over 12 percent; we were faced with substantial unemployment. But in the last uh – twenty-four months we’ve turned the economy around and we’ve brought inflation down to under 6 percent, and we have reduced the uh – well, we have added employment of about four million in the last seventeen months to the point where we have eighty-eight million people working in America today – the most in the history of the country. The net result is we are going to have some improvement in our receipts. And I think we’ll have some decrease in our disbursements. We expect to have a lower deficit in fiscal year 1978. We feel that with this improvement in the economy; we feel with more receipts and fewer disbursements we can in a moderate way increase, as I recommended, over the next ten years a new parks program that would cast a billion and a half dollars, doubling our national park system. We have recommended that in the h- housing program we can reduce down payments and moderate monthly payments. But that doesn’t cost any more as far as the federal treasury is concerned. We believe that we can uh do a better job in the area of crime, but that requires a tougher sentencing, mandatory certain prison sentences for those who violate our criminal laws. We – uh believe that uh you can revise the federal criminal code, which has not been revised in a good many years. That doesn’t cost any more money. We believe that you can uhh – do something more effectively with a moderate increase in money in the drug abuse program. We feel that uh – in education we can have a slight increase – not a major increase. It’s my understanding that Governor Carter has indicated that uh – he approves of a $30 billion uh – expenditure by the federal government as far as education is concerned. At the present time we’re spending roughly three billion five hundred million dollars. I don’t know where that money would come from. But as we look at the quality-of-life programs – jobs, health, education, crime, recreation – we feel that as we move forward with a healthier economy, we can absorb the small necessary cost that will be required.

We feel that uh – with the programs that I have recommended, the additional $10 billion tax cut, with the moderate increases in the quality-of-life area, we can still have a balanced budget which I will submit to the Congress in January of 1978. We won’t wait one year or two years longer, as Governor Carter uh – indicates. As the economy improves, and it is improving, our gross national product this year will average about 6 percent increase over last year. We will have the lower rate of inflation for the uh – calendar year this year – something slightly under 6 percent. Employment will be up, revenues will be up. We’ll keep the lid on some of these programs that we can hold down as we have a little extra money to spend for those quality-of-life programs which I think are needed and necessary. Now I cannot, and would not, endorse the kind of program that uh – Governor Carter recommends. He endorses the Democratic uh – platform which, as I read it, calls for approximately sixty additional programs. We estimate that those programs would add a hundred billion dollars minimum and probably two hundred billion dollars – uhh maximum each year to the federal budget. Those programs you cannot afford and give tax relief. We feel that you can hold the line and restrain federal spending, give a tax reduction and still have a balanced budget by 1978.

Governor Carter skims over a very serious and a very broad subject. In January of uh – 1975 I submitted to the Congress and to the American people the first comprehensive energy program recommended by any president. It called for an increase in the production of energy in the United States. It called for uh – conservation measures so that we would save the energy that we have. If you’re going to increase domestic oil and gas production – and we have to – you have to give those producers an opportunity to uh – develop their land or their wells. I recommended to the Congress that we should increase production in this country from six hundred million tons a year to twel- a- a billion two hundred million tons by 1985. In order to do that we have to improve our extraction of coal from the ground; we have to improve our utilization of coal – make it more efficient, make it cleaner. In addition we uh – have to expand our research and development. In my program for energy independence we have increased, for example, solar energy research from about $84 million a year to about a hundred and twenty million dollars a year. We’re going as fast as the experts say we should. In nuclear power we have increased the research and development, uh – under the Energy Research and Development Agency uh – very substantially, to insure that our ener- uh – nuclear power plants are safer, that they are more efficient, and that we have adequate safeguards. I think you have to have greater oil and gas production, more coal production, more nuclear production, and in addition you have to have energy conservation.

The bills that I vetoed, the one for an additional $6 billion, was not a bill that would have solved our unemployment problems. Even the proponents of it admitted that no more than four hundred thousand jobs would be uh – made available. Our analysis indicates that something in the magnitude of about one hundred fifty to two hundred thousand jobs would uh – be made available. Each one of those jobs would’ve cost the taxpayers $25 thousand. In addition, the jobs would not be available right now. They would not have materialized for about nine to eighteen months. The immediate problem we have is to stimulate our economy now so that we can get rid of unemployment. What we have done is to hold the lid on spending in an effort to reduce the rate of inflation. And we have proven, I think very conclusively, that you can reduce the rate of inflation and increase jobs. For example, as I have said, we have added some four million jobs in the last seventeen months. We have now employed eighty-eight million people in America, the largest number in the history of the United States. We’ve added five hundred thousand jobs in the last two months. Inflation is the quickest way to destroy jobs. And by holding the lid on federal spending we have been able to do an- a good job, an affirmative job in inflation and as a result have added to the jobs in this country. I think it’s uh – also appropriate to point out that through our tax policies we have stimulated uhh – added employment throughout the country, the investment tax credit, the tax incentives for expansion and modernization of our industrial capacity. It’s my – my opinion that the private sector, where five out of six jobs are, where you have permanent jobs, with the opportunity for advancement, is a better place than make-work jobs under the program recommended by the Congress.

Well, that bill has not yet come down to the Oval Office, so I am not in a position to make any judgment on it tonight. But that is an extra $4 billion that would uh – add to the deficit which would add to the inflationary pressures, which would help to destroy jobs in the private sector – not make jobs, where the jobs really are. These make-work, temporary jobs – dead end as they are – are not the kind of jobs that we want for our people. I think it’s interesting to point out that uh – in the uh – two years that I’ve been president I’ve vetoed fifty-six bills. Congress has sustained forty-two vetoes. As a result, we have saved over $9 billion in federal expenditures. And the Congress by overriding the bills that I did veto, the Congress has added some $13 billion to the federal expenditures and to the federal deficit. Now Governor Carter complains about the deficits that uh – uh – this administration has had. And yet he condemns the vetoes that I have made that has – that have saved the taxpayer $9 billion and could have saved an additional $13 billion. Now he can’t have it both ways. And therefore, it seems to me that we should hold the lid, as we have, to the best of our ability so we can stimulate the private economy and get the jobs where the jobs are – five out of six in this economy.

Governor Carter’s answer tonight does not coincide with the answer that he gave in an interview to the Associated Press a week or so ago. In that interview uh – Governor Carter indicated that uh – he would raise the taxes on those in the medium or middle-income brackets or higher. Now if you uh – take the medium or middle-income taxpayer – that’s about $14 thousand per person – uh – Governor Carter has indicated, publicly, in an interview that he would increase the taxes on about 50 percent of the working people of this country. I think uh – the way to get tax equity in this country is to give tax relief to the middle-income people who have an income from roughly $8 thousand up to twenty-five or thirty thousand dollars. They have been short-changed as we have taken ten million taxpayers off the tax rolls in the last eight years, and as we have uh – added to the minimum tax uh – provision to make all people pay more taxes. I believe in tax equity for the middle-income taxpayer, increasing the personal exemption. Mr. Carter wants to increase taxes for roughly half of the taxpayers of this country. Now, the Governor has also played a little fast and loose with the facts about vetoes. The records show that President Roosevelt vetoed an average of fifty-five bills a year. President Truman vetoed on the average, while he was president, about thirty-eight bills a year. I understand that Governor Carter, when he was Governor of Georgia, vetoed between thirty-five and forty bills a year. My average in two years is twenty-six. But in the process of that we have saved uhh – $9 billion. And one final comment, uh – Governor Carter talks about the tax bills and all of the inequities that exist in the present law. I must remind him the Democrats have controlled the Congress for the last twenty-two years and they wrote all the tax bills.

There is a considerable anti-Washington feeling throughout the country. But I think the feeling is misplaced. In the last two years, we have restored integrity in the White House, and we’ve set high standards in the executive branch of the government. The anti-Washington feeling, in my opinion, ought to be focused on the Congress of the United States. For example, this Congress, very shortly, will spend a billion dollars a year for its housekeeping, its salaries, its expenses and the like. It – the next Congress will probably be the first billion-dollar Congress in the history of the United States. I don’t think the American people are getting their money’s worth from the majority party that run this Congress. We, in addition, see that uh – in the last uh – four years the number of employees hired by the Congress has gone up substantial- uh much more than uh – the gross national product, much more than any other increase throughout our society. Congress is hiring people by the droves, and the cast as a result has gone up. And I don’t see any improvement in the performance of the Congress under the present leadership. So it seems to me instead of the anti-Washington feeling being aimed at everybody in Washington, it seems to me that the focus should be where the problem is, which is the Congress of the United States, and particularly the majority in the Congress. They spend too much money on themselves. They have too many employees. There’s some question about their morality. It seems to me that in this election, the focus should not be on the executive branch but the corrections should come as the voters vote for their members of the House of Representatives or for their United States senator. That’s where the problem is and I hope there’ll be some corrective action taken so we can get some new leadership in the Congress of the United States.

Well, It seems to me that uh – we have a chance – the Republicans – to get a majority in the House of Representatives. We will make some gains in the United States Senate. So there will be different ratios in the House, as well as in the Senate, and as president I will be able to uh – work with that Congress. But let me take the other side of the coin, if I might. Supposing we had – had a Democratic Congress for the last two years and we’d had uh – Governor Carter as President. He has, in effect, said that he would agree with all of – he would disapprove of the vetoes that I have made, and would have added significantly to expenditures and the deficit in the federal government. I think it would be contrary to one of the basic concepts in our system of government – a system of checks and balances. We have a Democratic Congress today, and fortunately we’ve had a Republican president to check their excesses with my vetoes. If we have a Democratic Congress next year, and a president who wants to spend an additional one hundred billion dollars a year, or maybe two hundred billion dollars a year, with more programs, we will have in my judgment, greater deficits with more spending, more dangers of inflation. I think the American people want a Republican president to check on any excesses that come out of the next Congress, if it is a Democratic Congress.

The chairman of the Federal Reserve Board should be independent. Fortunately, he has been during Democratic as well as Republican administrations. As the result in the last uh – two years uh – we have had a responsible monetary policy. Uh the Federal Reserve Board indicated that the supply of money would be held between four to four and a half and seven and seven and a half. They have done a good job in integrating the money supply with the uh – fiscal policy of the uh – executive and legislative branches of the government. It would be catastrophic if the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board became the tool of the political uh – party that was in power. It’s important for our future uhh – economic security that that job be nonpolitical and uh – separate from the executive and the Legislative branches.

You are familiar, of course, with the fact that I am the first president in thirty years who has reorganized the intelligence agencies in the federal government: the CIA, the Defense Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency and the others. We’ve done that by executive order. Uhh – and I think uh – we’ve tightened it up; we’ve uh – straightened out their problems that developed over the last few years. It doesn’t seem to me that it’s needed or necessary to have legislation in this particular regard. Uhh – I have recommended to the Congress, however – I’m sure you’re familiar with this – legislation that would uhh – make it uhh – very uhh – proper in – in the right way, that the attorney general could go in and get the right for wiretapping under security cases. This was an effort that was made by the attorney general and myself, working with the Congress. But even in this area, where I think new legislation would be justified, uh the Congress has not responded. So, I feel in that case, as well as in the reorganization of the intelligence agencies, as I’ve done, we have to do it by executive order. And I’m glad that we have a good director in George Bush. We have good executive orders, and the CIA and the DIA and NASA uh – uh – NSA are now doing a good job under proper supervision.

On November second all of you will make a very, very important decision. One of the major issues in this campaign is trust. A president should never promise more than he can deliver and a president should always deliver everything that he’s promised. A president can’t be all things to all people. A president should be the same thing to all people. Another issue in this campaign, Governor Carter has endorsed the Democratic platform, which calls for more spending, bigger deficits, more inflation or mare taxes. Governor Carter has embraced the record of the present Congress, dominated by his political party. It calls for more of the same. Governor Carter in his acceptance speech called for more and more programs, which means more and more government. I think the real issue in this campaign, and that which you must decide on November second, is whether you should vote for his promise or my performance in two years in the White House. On the fourth of July we had a wonderful two hundredth birthday – for our great country. It was a superb occasion. It was a glorious day. In the first century of our nation’s history our forefathers gave us the finest form of government in the history of mankind. In the second century of our nation’s history, our forefathers developed the most productive industrial nation in the history of the globe. Our third century should be the century of individual freedom for all our two hundred and fifteen million Americans today and all that join us. In the last few years government has gotten bigger and bigger; industry has gotten larger and larger; labor unions have gotten bigger and bigger; and our children have been the victims of mass education. We must make this next century the century of the individual. We should never forget that a government big enough to give us everything we want is a government big enough to take from us everything we have. The individual worker in the plants throughout the United States should not be a small cog in a big machine. The member of a labor union must have his rights strengthened and broadened and our children in their education should have an opportunity to improve themselves based on their talents and their abilities. My mother and father, during the Depression, worked very hard to give me an opportunity to do better in our great country. Your mothers and fathers did the same thing for you and others. Betty and I have worked very hard to give our children a brighter future in the United States, our beloved country. You and others in this great country have worked hard and done a great deal to give your children and your grandchildren the blessings of a better America. I believe we can all work together to make the individuals in the future have more and all of us working together can build a better America.
