Yes. I don’t believe that Mr. Mondale has a plan for balancing the budget; he has a plan for raising taxes. And, as a matter of fact, the biggest single tax increase in our nation’s history took place 1977. And for the 5 years previous to our taking office, taxes doubled in the United States, and the budgets increased $318 billion. So, there is no ratio between taxing and balancing a budget. Whether you borrow the money or whether you simply tax it away from the people, you’re taking the same amount of money out of the private sector, unless and until you bring down government’s share of what it is taking.

With regard to Social Security, I hope there’ll be more time than just this minute to mention that, but I will say this: A President should never say “never.” But I’m going to violate that rule and say “never.” I will never stand for a reduction of the Social Security benefits to the people that are now getting them.

Well, whether he does or not, let me suggest my own idea about the leadership factor, since you’ve asked it. And, incidentally, I might say that with regard to the 25-percent cut in Social Security — before I get to the answer to your question — the only 25-percent cut that I know of was accompanying that huge 1977 tax increase, was a cut of 25 percent in the benefits for every American who was born after 1916.

Now, leadership. First of all, I think you must have some principles you believe in. In mine, I happen to believe in the people and believe that the people are supposed to be dominant in our society — that they, not government, are to have control of their own affairs to the greatest extent possible, with an orderly society.

Now, having that, I think also that in leadership — well, I believe that you find people, positions such as I’m in who have the talent and ability to do the things that are needed in the various departments of government. I don’t believe that a leader should be spending his time in the Oval Office deciding who’s going to play tennis on the White House court. And you let those people go with the guidelines of overall policy, not looking over their shoulder and nitpicking the manner in which they go at the job. You are ultimately responsible, however, for that job.

But I also believe something else about that. I believe that — and when I became Governor of California, I started this, and I continue it in this office — that any issue that comes before me, I have instructed Cabinet members and staff they are not to bring up any of the political ramifications that might surround the issue. I don’t want to hear them. I want to hear only arguments as to whether it is good or bad for the people — is it morally right? And on that basis and that basis alone, we make a decision on every issue.

Now, with regard to my feeling about why I thought that his record bespoke his possible taking us back to the same things that we knew under the previous administration, his record is that he spoke in praise of deficits several times, said they weren’t to be abhorred — that, as a matter of fact, he at one time said he wished the deficit could be doubled, because they stimulate the economy and helped reduce unemployment.

Our policy was not to cut subsidies. We have believed in partnership, and that was an example of a partnership between, not only local government and the Federal Government but also between the private sector that built that particular structure. And this is what we’ve been trying to do, is involve the Federal Government in such partnerships.

We are today subsidizing housing for more than 10 million people, and we’re going to continue along that line. We have no thought of throwing people out into the snow, whether because of age or need. We have preserved the safety net for the people with true need in this country, and it has been pure demagoguery that we have in some way shut off all the charitable programs or many of them for the people who have real need. The safety net is there, and we’re taking care of more people than has ever been taken care of before by any administration in this country.

Well, let me just respond with regard to Social Security. When we took office, we discovered that the program that the Carter-Mondale administration had said would solve the fiscal problems of Social Security for the next 50 years wouldn’t solve them for 5. Social Security was due to go bankrupt before 1983.

Any proposals that I made at that time were at the request of the chairman, a Democrat, of one of the leading committees, who said we have to do something before the program goes broke and the checks bounce. And so, we made a proposal. And then in 1982, they used that proposal in a demagogic fashion for the 1982 campaign. And 3 days after the election in 1982, they came to us and said, Social Security, we know, is broke. Indeed, we had to borrow $17 billion to pay the checks. And then I asked for a bipartisan commission, which I’d asked for from the beginning, to sit down and work out a solution.

And so, the whole matter of what to do with Social Security has been resolved by bipartisan legislation, and it is on a sound basis now for as far as you can see into the next century.

Well, I was raised to have a faith and a belief and have been a member of a church since I was a small boy. In our particular church, we did not use that term, “born again,” so I don’t know whether I would fit that — that particular term. But I have — thanks to my mother, God rest her soul — the firmest possible belief and faith in God. And I don’t believe — I believe, I should say, as Lincoln once said, that I could not — I would be the most stupid man in the world if I thought I could confront the duties of the office I hold if I could not turn to someone who was stronger and greater than all others. And I do resort to prayer.

At the same time, however, I have not believed that prayer should be introduced into an election or be a part of a political campaign — or religion a part of that campaign. As a matter of fact, I think religion became a part of this campaign when Mr. Mondale’s running mate said I wasn’t a good Christian.

So, it does play a part in my life. I have no hesitancy in saying so. And, as I say, I don’t believe that I could carry on unless I had a belief in a higher authority and a belief that prayers are answered.

The answer to your question is very simple about why I don’t go to church. I have gone to church regularly all my life, and I started to here in Washington. And now, in the position I hold and in the world in which we live, where Embassies do get blown up in Beirut — we’re supposed to talk about that on the debate the 21st, I understand — but I pose a threat to several hundred people if I go to church.

I know the threats that are made against me. We all know the possibility of terrorism. We have seen the barricades that have had to be built around the White House. And, therefore, I don’t feel — and my minister knows this and supports me in this position — I don’t feel that I have a right to go to church, knowing that my being there could cause something of the kind that we have seen in other places, in Beirut, for example. And I miss going to church, but I think the Lord understands. [Applause]

Yes, it’s very difficult to rebut, because I find myself in so much agreement with Mr. Mondale. I, too, want that wall that is in the Constitution of separation of church and state to remain there. The only attacks I have made are on people who apparently would break away at that wall from the government side, using the government, using the power of the courts and so forth to hinder that part of the Constitution that says the government shall not only not establish a religion, it shall not inhibit the practice of religion. And they have been using these things to have government, through court orders, inhibit the practice of religion. A child wants to say grace in a school cafeteria and a court rules that they can’t do it because it’s school property. These are they types of things that I think have been happening in a kind of a secular way that have been eroding that separation, and I am opposed to that.

With regard to a platform on the Supreme Court, I can only say one thing about that. I have appointed one member to the Supreme Court: Sandra Day O’Connor. I’ll stand on my record on that. And if I have the opportunity to appoint any more, I’ll do it in the same manner that I did in selecting her.

Well, again, I’m running on the record. I think sometimes Mr. Mondale’s running away from his. But I’m running on the record of what we have asked for. We’ll continue to try to get things that we didn’t get in a program that has already brought the rate of spending of government down from 17 percent to 6.1 percent, a program of returning authority and autonomy to the local and State governments that has been unjustly seized by the Federal Government. And you might find those words in a Democratic platform of some years ago — I know, because I was a Democrat at that time. And I left the party eventually, because I could no longer follow the turn in the Democratic leadership that took us down an entirely different path, a path of centralizing authority in the Federal Government, lacking trust in the American people.

I promised, when we took office, that we would reduce inflation. We have, to one-third of what it was. I promised that we would reduce taxes. We did, 25 percent across the board. That barely held even with — if it did that much — with the gigantic tax increase imposed in 1977. But at least it took that burden away from them.

I said that we would create jobs for our people, and we did — 6 million in the last 20 or 21 months. I said that we would become respected in the world once again and that we would refurbish our national defense to the place that we could deal on the world scene and then seek disarmament, reduction of arms, and, hopefully, an elimination of nuclear weapons. We have done that.

All of the things that I said we would do, from inflation being down, interest rates being down, unemployment falling, all of those things we have done. And I think this is something the American people see.

I think they also know that we had a commission that came in a year ago with a recommendation on education — on excellence in education. And today, without the Federal Government being involved other than passing on to them, the school districts, the words from that commission, we find 35 States with task forces now dealing with their educational problems. We find that schools are extending the curriculum to now have forced teaching of mathematics and science and so forth. All of these things have brought an improvement in the college entrance exams for the first time in some 20 years.

So, I think that many Democrats are seeing the same thing this Democrat saw: The leadership isn’t taking us where we want to go.

There are tasks that government legitimately should enforce and tasks that government performs well, and you’ve named some of them. Crime has come down the last 2 years, for the first time in many, many decades that it has come down — or since we’ve kept records — 2 consecutive years, and last year it came down the biggest drop in crime that we’ve had. I think that we’ve had something to do with that, just as we have with the drug problem nationwide.

The environment? Yes, I feel as strongly as anyone about the preservation of the environment. When we took office, we found that the national parks were so dirty and contained so many hazards, lack of safety features, that we stopped buying additional park land until we had rectified this with what was to be a 5-year program — but it’s just about finished already — a billion dollars. And now we’re going back to budgeting for additional lands for our parks. We have added millions of acres to the wilderness lands, to the game refuges. I think that we’re out in front of most — and I see that the red light is blinking, so I can’t continue. But I’ve got more.

Before I campaigned as a Democrat for a Republican candidate for President, I had already voted for Dwight Eisenhower to be President of the United States. And so, my change had come earlier than that. I hadn’t gotten around to reregistering as yet. I found that was rather difficult to do. But I finally did it.

There are some other things that have been said here — back, and you said that I might be able to dredge them up. Mr. Mondale referred to the farmers’ worst year. The farmers are not the victims of anything this administration has done. The farmers were the victims of the double-digit inflation and the 21\1/2\-percent interest rates of the Carter-Mondale administration and the grain embargo, which destroyed our reliability nationwide as a supplier. All of these things are presently being rectified, and I think that we are going to salvage the farmers. As a matter of fact, there has been less than one-quarter of 1 percent of foreclosures of the 270,000 loans from government that the farmers have.

I have believed that in the appointment of judges that all that was specified in the party platform was that they respect the sanctity of human life. Now, that I would want to see in any judge and with regard to any issue having to do with human life. But with regard to abortion, and I have a feeling that this is — there’s been some reference without naming it here in the remarks of Mr. Mondale tied to injecting religion into government. With me, abortion is not a problem of religion, it’s a problem of the Constitution.

I believe that until and unless someone can establish that the unborn child is not a living human being, then that child is already protected by the Constitution, which guarantees life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness to all of us. And I think that this is what we should concentrate on, is trying — I know there were weeks and weeks of testimony before a Senate committee, there were medical authorities, there were religious — there were clerics there — everyone talking about this matter of prolife. And at the end of all of that, not one shred of evidence was introduced that the unborn child was not alive. We have seen premature births that are now grown-up, happy people going around.

Also, there is a strange dichotomy in this whole position about our courts ruling that abortion is not the taking of a human life. In California, sometime ago, a man beat a woman so savagely that her unborn child was born dead with a fractured skull, and the California State Legislature unanimously passed a law that was signed by the then-Democratic Governor — signed a law that said that any man who so abuses a pregnant woman that he causes the death of her unborn child shall be charged with murder. Now, isn’t it strange that that same woman could have taken the life of her unborn child, and it was abortion and not murder, but if somebody else does it, that’s murder? And it used the term “death of the unborn child.”

So, this has been my feeling about abortion, that we have a problem now to determine — and all the evidence so far comes down on the side of the unborn child being a living human being.

The laws regarding that always were State laws. It was only when the Supreme Court handed down a decision that the Federal Government intervened in what had always been a State policy. Our laws against murder are State laws. So, I would think that this would be the point of enforcement on this.

As I say, I feel that we have a problem here to resolve. And no one has approached it from that matter. It does not happen that the church that I belong to had that as part of its dogma. I know that some churches do.

Now, it is a sin if you’re taking a human life. At the same time, in our Judeo-Christian tradition, we recognize the right of taking a human life in self-defense. And therefore, I’ve always believed that a mother, if medically it is determined that her life is at risk if she goes through with the pregnancy, she has a right then to take the life of even her own unborn child in defense of her own.

Yes. Well, with regard to this being a personal choice, isn’t that what a murderer is insisting on, his or her right to kill someone because of whatever fault they think justifies that?

Now, I’m not capable, and I don’t think you are, any of us, to make this determination that must be made with regard to human life. I am simply saying that I believe that that’s where the effort should be directed — to make that determination.

I don’t think that any of us should be called upon here to stand and make a decision as to what other things might come under the self-defense tradition. That, too, would have to be worked out then, when you once recognize that we’re talking about a life. But in this great society of ours, wouldn’t it make a lot more sense, in this gentle and kind society, if we had a program that made it possible for when incidents come along in which someone feels they must do away with that unborn child, that instead we make it available for the adoption? There are a million and a half people out there standing in line waiting to adopt children who can’t have them any other way.

You know, I wasn’t going to say this at all, but I can’t help it. There you go again. [Laughter] I don’t have a plan to tax — or increase taxes. I’m not going to increase taxes. I can understand why you are, Mr. Mondale, because as a Senator you voted 16 times to increase taxes.

Now, I believe that our problem has not been that anybody in our country is undertaxed; it’s that government is overfed. And I think that most of our people — this is why we had a 25-percent tax cut across the board which maintained the same progressivity of our tax structure in the brackets on up. And, as a matter of fact, it just so happens that in the quirks of administering these taxes, those above $50,000 actually did not get quite as big a tax cut percentage-wise as did those from 50,000 down. From 50,000 down, those people paid two-thirds of the taxes, and those people got two-thirds of the tax cut.

Now, the Social Security tax of ’77 — this indeed was a tax that hit people in the lower brackets the hardest. It had two features. It had several tax increases phased in over a period of time — there are two more yet to come between now and 1989. At the same time every year, it increased the amount of money — virtually every year, there may have been one or two that were skipped in there — that was subject to that tax. Today it is up to about $38,000 of earnings that is subject to the payroll tax for Social Security. And that tax, there are no deductions, so a person making anywhere from 10, 15, 20 — they’re paying that tax on the full gross earnings that they have after they have already paid an income tax on that same amount of money.

Now, I don’t think that to try and say that we were taxing the rich, and not the other way around, it just doesn’t work out that way. The system is still where it was with regard to the progressivity, as I’ve said, and that has not been changed. But if you take it in numbers of dollars instead of percentage, yes, you could say, well, that person got 10 times as much as this other person. Yes, but he paid 10 times as much, also. But if you take it in percentages, then you find out that it is fair and equitable across the board.

Yes, I had used — “last resort” would always be with me. If you got the Government down to the lowest level, that you yourself could say it could not go any lower and still perform the services for the people, and if the recovery was so complete that you knew you were getting the ultimate amount of revenues that you could get through that growth, and there was still some slight difference there between those two lines, then I had said once that, yes, you would have to then look to see if taxes should not be adjusted.

I don’t foresee those things happening, so I say with great confidence I’m not going to go for a tax.

With regard to assailing Mr. Bush about his tax problems and the difference from the tax he once paid and then the later tax he paid, I think if you looked at the deductions, there were great legal expenses in there — had to do, possibly, with the sale of his home, and they had to do with his setting up of a blind trust. All of those are legally deductions, deductible in computing your tax, and it was a 1-year thing with him.

Yes.

Mm-hmm.

Yes. With regard to Medicare, no, but it’s time for us to say that Medicare is in pretty much the same condition that Social Security was, and something is going to have to be done in the next several years to make it fiscally sound. And, no, I never proposed any $20 billion should come out of Medicare; I have proposed that the program we must treat with that particular problem. And maybe part of that problem is because during the 4 years of the Carter-Mondale administration medical costs in this country went up 87 percent.

I gave you back some of that time. [Laughter]

Well, some of those facts and figures just don’t stand up. Yes, there has been an increase in poverty, but it is a lower rate of increase than it was in the preceding years before we got here. It has begun to decline, but it is still going up.

On the other hand, women heads of household — single women heads of household have — for the first time there’s been a turndown in the rate of poverty for them. We have found also in our studies that in this increase in poverty, it all had to do with their private earnings. It had nothing to do with the transfer of payments from government by way of many programs.

We are spending now 37 percent more on food for the hungry in all the various types of programs than was spent in 1980. We’re spending a third more on all of the — well, all of the programs of human service. We have more people receiving food stamps than were ever receiving them before — 2,300,000 more are receiving them — even though we took 850,000 off the food stamp rolls because they were making an income that was above anything that warranted their fellow citizens having to support them. We found people making 185 percent of the poverty level were getting government benefits. We have set a line at 130 percent so that we can direct that aid down to the truly needy.

Some time ago, Mr. Mondale said something about education and college students and help of that kind. Half — one out of two of the full-time college students in the United States are receiving some form of Federal aid. But there, again, we found people that there under the previous administration, families that had no limit to income were still eligible for low-interest college loans. We didn’t think that was right. And so, we have set a standard that those loans and those grants are directed to the people who otherwise could not go to college, their family incomes were so low.

So, there are a host of other figures that reveal that the grant programs are greater than they have ever been, taking care of more people than they ever have. 7.7 million elderly citizens who were living in the lowest 20 percent of earnings — 7.7 million have moved up into another bracket since our administration took over, leaving only 5 million of the elderly in that bracket when there had been more than 13 million.

Yes.

That had nothing to do with the other thing of talking about their needs or anything. I remember distinctly, I was segueing into another subject. I was talking about the things that have been accomplished, and that was referring to the revival of patriotism and optimism, the new spirit that we’re finding all over America. And it is a wonderful thing to see when you get out there among the people. So, that was the only place that that was used.

I did avoid, I’m afraid, in my previous answer, also, the idea of uneven, yes. There is no way that the recovery is even across the country, just as in the depths of the recession, there were some parts of the country that were worse off, but some that didn’t even feel the pain of the recession.

We’re not going to rest and not going to be happy until every person in this country who wants a job can have one, until the recovery is complete across the country.

Yes. The connection that’s been made again between the deficit and the interest rates — there is no connection between them. There is a connection between interest rates and inflation, but I would call to your attention that in 1981 while we were operating still on the Carter-Mondale budget that we inherited — that the interest rates came down from 21\1/2\, down toward the 12 or 13 figure. And while they were coming down, the deficits had started their great increase. They were going up. Now, if there was a connection I think that there would be a different parallel between deficits getting larger and interest rates going down.

The interest rates are based on inflation. And right now I have to tell you I don’t think there is any excuse for the interest rates being as high as they are because we have brought inflation down so low. I think it can only be that they’re anticipating or hope — expecting, not hoping, that maybe we don’t have a control of inflation and it’s going to go back up again. Well, it isn’t going to go back up. We’re going to see that it doesn’t.

And I haven’t got time to answer with regard to the disabled.

Well, now, I have to start with a smile, since his kind words to me.

I’ll tell you what I think has been the most outrageous thing in political dialog, both in this campaign and the one in ’82. And that is the continued discussion and claim that somehow I am the villain who is going to pull the Social Security checks out from those people who are dependent on them.

And why I think it is outrageous — first of all, it isn’t true. But why it is outrageous is because, for political advantage, every time they do that, they scare millions of senior citizens who are totally dependent on Social Security, have no place else to turn. And they have to live and go to bed at night thinking, “Is this true? Is someone going to take our check away from us and leave us destitute?” And I don’t think that that should be a part of political dialog.

Now, to — I still — I just have a minute here?

Oh, I — —

Okay. All right.

Now, Social Security, let’s lay it to rest once and for all. I told you never would I do such a thing. But I tell you also now, Social Security has nothing to do with the deficit. Social Security is totally funded by the payroll tax levied on employer and employee. If you reduce the out-go of Social Security, that money would not go into the general fund to reduce a deficit. It would go into the Social Security Trust Fund. So, Social Security has nothing to do with balancing a budget or erasing or lowering the deficit.

Now, again, to get to whether I am depending on magic, I think I have talked in straight economic terms about a program of recovery that I was told wouldn’t work. And then, after it worked, I was told that lowering taxes would increase inflation. And none of these things happened. It is working, and we’re going to continue on that same line.

As to what we might do, and find in further savings cuts, no, we’re not going to starve the hungry. But we have 2,478 specific recommendations from a commission of more than 2,000 business people in this country, through the Grace commission, that we’re studying right now — and we’ve already implemented 17 percent of them — that are recommendations as to how to make government more efficient, more economic.

Why the deficits are so much of a problem for him now, but that in 1976, when the deficit was $52 billion and everyone was panicking about that, he said, no, that he thought it ought to be bigger, because a bigger deficit would stimulate the economy and would help do away with unemployment. In 1979 he made similar statements, the same effect, that the deficits — there was nothing wrong with having deficits.

Remember, there was a trillion dollars in debt before we got here. That’s got to be paid by our children and grandchildren, too, if we don’t do it. And I’m hoping we can start some payments on it before we get through here. That’s why I want another 4 years.

No, I might as well just go with — —

I don’t think so. I’m all confused now.

All right.

Well, we’ll include it in that.

Four years ago, in similar circumstances to this, I asked you, the American people, a question. I asked: “Are you better off than you were 4 years before?” The answer to that obviously was no, and as the result, I was elected to this office and promised a new beginning.

Now, maybe I’m expected to ask that same question again. I’m not going to, because I think that all of you — or not everyone, those people that are in those pockets of poverty and haven’t caught up, they couldn’t answer the way I would want them to — but I think that most of the people in this country would say, yes, they are better off than they were 4 years ago.

The question, I think, should be enlarged. Is America better off than it was 4 years ago? And I believe the answer to that has to also be “yes.” I promised a new beginning. So far, it is only a beginning. If the job were finished, I might have thought twice about seeking reelection for this job.

But we now have an economy that, for the first time — well, let’s put it this way: In the first half of 1980, gross national product was down a minus 3.7 percent. The first half of ’84 it’s up 8\1/2\ percent. Productivity in the first half of 1980 was down a minus 2 percent. Today it is up a plus 4 percent.

Personal earnings after taxes per capita have gone up almost $3,000 in these 4 years. In 1980 — or 1979, a person with a fixed income of $8,000 was $500 above the poverty line, and this maybe explains why there are the numbers still in poverty. By 1980 that same person was $500 below the poverty line.

We have restored much of our economy. With regard to business investment, it is higher than it has been since 1949. So, there seems to be no shortage of investment capital. We have, as I said, cut the taxes, but we have reduced inflation, and for 2 years now it has stayed down there, not at double digit, but in the range of 4 or below. We believe that we had also promised that we would make our country more secure.

Yes, we have an increase in the defense budget. But back then we had planes that couldn’t fly for lack of spare parts or pilots. We had navy vessels that couldn’t leave harbor because of lack of crew or, again, lack of spare parts. Today we’re well on our way to a 600-ship navy. We have 543 at present.

We have — our military, the morale is high. I think the people should understand that two-thirds of the defense budget pays for pay and salary, or pay and pension. And then you add to that food and wardrobe, and all the other things, and you only have a small portion going for weapons. But I am determined that if ever our men are called on, they should have the best that we can provide in the manner of tools and weapons. There has been reference to expensive spare parts, hammers costing $500. Well, we are the ones who found those.

I think we’ve given the American people back their spirit. I think there’s an optimism in the land and a patriotism, and I think that we’re in a position once again to heed the words of Thomas Paine, who said: “We have it in our power to begin the world over again.”
