Well I might say first of all that I think in case of the Carter administration the sacrifices would be much less. Mr. Ford’s own uh – environmental agency has projected a 10 percent unemployment rate by 1978 if he’s uh – president. The American people are ready to make sacrifices if they are part of the process. If they know that they will be helping to make decisions and won’t be excluded from being an involved party to the national purpose. The major effort we must put forward is to put our people back to work. And I think that this uh – is one example where uh – a lot of people have selfish, grasping ideas now. I remember 1973 in the depth of the uh – energy crisis when President Nixon called on the American people to make a sacrifice, to cut down on the waste of uh – gasoline, to cut down on the uh – speed of automobiles. It was a – a tremendous surge of patriotism, that “I want to make a sacrifice for my country.” I think we uh – could call together, with strong leadership in the White House, business, industry and labor, and say let’s have voluntary price restraints. Let’s lay down some guidelines so we don’t have continuing inflation. We can also have a- an end to the extremes. We now have one extreme for instance, of some welfare recipients, who by taking advantage of the welfare laws, the housing laws, the uh – Medicaid uh – laws, and the uh – food stamp laws, make over $10 thousand a year and uh – they don’t have to pay any taxes on it. At the other extreme, uh – just 1 percent of the richest people in our country derive 25 percent of all the tax benefits. So both those extremes grasp for advantage and the person who has to pay that expense is the middle-income family who’s still working for a living and they have to pay for the rich who have privilege, and for the poor who are not working. But I think uh – uh – a balanced approach, with everybody being part of it and a striving for unselfishness, could help as it did in 1973 to let people sacrifice for their own country. I know I’m ready for it. I think the American people are too.

I think the major reason for a decrease in participation that we have experienced ever since 1960 has been the deep discouragement of the American people about the performance of public officials. When you’ve got seven and a half, eight million people out of work, and you’ve got three times as much inflation as you had during the last eight-year Democratic administration, when you have the highest deficits in history; when you have it uh – becoming increasingly difficult far a family to put a child through college or to own a home, there’s a natural inclination to be turned off. Also, in the aftermath of Vietnam and Cambodia and uh – Watergate and uh – the CIA revelations, people have feel – have felt that they’ve uh been betrayed by public officials, I have to admit that in the uh – heat of the campaign – I’ve been in thirty primaries during the springtime, I’ve been campaigning for twenty-two months – I’ve made some mistakes. And I think this is uh – uh – part of uh – of just being a human being. I – I have to say that my campaign has been an open one. And uh – the Playboy thing has been of great – very great concern to me. I don’t know how to deal with it exactly. Uh – I uh – agreed to give the interview uh – to Playboy Other people have done it who are notable – uh – Governor Jerry Brown, uh – Walter Cronkite, uh – Albert Schweitzer, Mr. Ford’s own secretary of the treasury, Mr. Simon, uh – William Buckley – many other people. But they weren’t running for president, and in retrospect, from hindsight, I would not have given that uh – interview had I do it – had it – I to do it over again. If I should ever decide in the future to discuss my – my deep Christian beliefs and uh – condemnation and sinfulness, I’ll use another forum besides Playboy. But I can say this, uh – I’m doing the best I can to get away from that, and during the next ten days, the American people will not see the Carter campaign running uh – television advertisements and newspaper advertisements based on a personal attack on President Ford’s character. I believe that the opposite is true with President Ford’s campaign, and uh – I hope that we can leave those issues in this next ten days about personalities and mistakes of the past – we’ve both made some mistakes – and talk about unemployment, inflation, housing, education, taxation, government organization, stripping away of secrecy, and the things that are crucial to the American people. I regret the things in my own long campaign that have been mistaken, but I’m trying to do away with those the last ten days.

I don’t have a response.

In the last uh – two weeks, I’ve had a chance to talk to uh – two men who have visited uh – the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia and China. One is Governor Avell- Averell Harriman, who visited the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia, and the other is James Schlesinger, whom I think you accompanied to uh – China. I got a- a complete report back from those countries from these two distinguished – uh – gentlemen. Mr. Harriman talked to the leaders in Yugoslavia, and I think it’s accurate to say that there is no uh – prospect in their opinion, of the Soviet Union invading uh – Yugoslavia should uh – Mr. Tito pass away. The present leadership uh – there is uh – is fairly uniform in – in their purpose, and I think it’s a close-knit group, uh – and uh – I think it would be unwise for us to say that we will go to war uh – in Yugoslavia uh – if the Soviets should invade, which I think would be an extremely unlikely thing. I have maintained from the very beginning of my campaign, and this was a standard answer that I made in response to the Yugoslavian question, that I would never uh – go to war or become militarily involved, in the internal affairs of another country unless our own security was direc- rectly threatened. And uh – I don’t believe that our security would be directly threatened if the Soviet Union went uh – into Yugoslavia. I don’t believe it will happen. I certainly hope it won’t. I would take eh – the strongest possible measures short of uh – actual military uh – action there by our own troops, but I doubt that that would be an eventuality.

Yes.) Did you clear the response you made with Secretary Schlesinger and Governor Harriman?

No, I did not.

Well, just briefly, I – I think this is uh – the second time that General Brown has made a statement that – for which he did have to apologize. And I know that everybody uh – makes mistakes. I think the first one was related to uh – the unwarranted influence of American Jews on the media and uh – in the Congress. This one concerned uh – Great Britain. I think he said that Israel was a – a military burden on us and that Iran hoped to reestablish the Persian Empire. Ah – I’m not uh – sure that I remembered earlier that President Ford had – had expressed uh – his concern about the statement or apologized for it. This is uh – something, though, that I think uh – is indicative of the need among the American people to know how its commander-in-chief, the president, feels and – and – and I think the only criticism that I would have uh – on – of Mr. Ford is that uh – immediately when the statement was re – re – revealed, uh – perhaps a – a statement from the president would have been a clarifying and a very beneficial thing.

I don’t believe it does. Uh – I began campaigning uh – twenty-two months ago. At that time, nobody thought I had a chance to win. Uh – very few people knew who I was. I came from a tiny town, as you know, Plains, and didn’t hold public office, didn’t have very much money. And my first organization was just four or five people plus my wife and my children, my three sons and their wives. And we won the nomination by going out into the streets – barbershops, beauty parlors, restaurants, stores, in factory shift lines also in farmers’ markets and livestock sale barns – and we talked a lot and we listened a lot and we learned from the American people. And we built up uh – an awareness among the uh – voters of this country, particularly those in whose primaries I entered – thirty of them, nobody’s ever done that before – about who I was and what I stood for. Now we have a very, very wide-ranging group of advisers who help me prepare for these debates and who teach me about international economics, and foreign affairs, defense matters, health, education, welfare, government reorganization. I’d say, several hundred of them. And they’re very fine and very highly qualified. The one major decision that I have made since acquiring the nomination, and I share this with President Ford, is the choice of a vice president. I think this should be indicative of the kind of leaders I would choose to help me if I am elected. I chose Senator Walter Mondale. And the only criterion I ever put forward in my own mind was who among the several million people in this country would be the best person qualified to be president, if something should happen to me and to join me in being vice president if I should serve out my term. And I’m convinced now, more than I was when I got the nomination, that Walter Mondale was the right choice, And I believe this is a good indication of the kind of people I would choose in the future. Mr. Ford has had that same choice to make. I don’t want to say anything critical of Senator Dole, but I’ve never heard Mr. Ford say that that was his prim- primary consideration – Who is the best person I could choose in this country to be president of the United States? I feel completely at ease knowing that someday Senator Mondale might very well be president. In the last five pres- vice presidential uh – nominees, uh – incumbents, three of them have become president. But I think this is indicative of what I would do.

Well, I might say that I think the League of Conservation Voters is absolutely right. This uh – administration’s record on environment is very bad. Uh – I think it’s accurate to say that the uh – strip-mining law which was passed twice by the Congress – uh – and was only like two votes I believe of being overridden – would have been good for the country. The claim that it would have put hundred and forty thousand miners out of work is uh – hard to believe, when at the time Mr. Ford vetoed it, the United Mine Workers was uh – supporting the bill. And I don’t think they would have supported the uh – bill had they known that they would lose a hundred and forty thousand jobs. There’s been a consistent policy on the part of this administration to lower or delay enforcement of air pollution standards and water pollution standards. And under both President Nixon and Ford, monies have been impounded that would’ve gone to uh – cities and others to control uh – water pollution. We have no energy policy. We, I think, are the only developed nation in the world that has no comprehensive energy policy, to permit us to plan in an orderly way how to shift from increasing the scarce uh – energy uh – forms: oil, and have research and development concentrated on the increased use of coal, which I strongly favor. The research and development to be used primary to make the coal burning uh – be clean. We need a heritage trust program, similar to the one we had in Georgia, to set aside additional lands that have uh – geological and archeological importance, uh natural areas for enjoyment. Uh – the lands that Mr. Ford uh – brags about having approved are in Alaska and they are enormous in uh – in size. But as far as the accessibility of them by the American people, it’s very uh – far in the future. We’ve taken no strong position in the uh – control of pollution of our oceans, and I would say the worst uh – threat to the environment of all is nuclear proliferation. And this administration, having been in office now for two years or more, has still not taken strong and bold action to stop the proliferation of nuclear waste around the world, particularly plutonium. Those are some brief remarks about the failures of this administration. I would do the opposite in every respect.

Yes, I’d be glad to. In the first place, uh – as is the case with the environmental policy and the energy policy that I just described, and the policy for nonproliferation of uh – of nuclear waste, this administration has no urban policy. It’s impossible for mayors or governors to cooperate with the resident, because they can’t anticipate what’s gonna happen next. A mayor of a city like New York, for instance, needs to know uh – eighteen months or two years ahead of time what responsibility the city will have in administration and in financing – in things like housing, uh – pollution control, uh – crime control, education, welfare and health. This has not been done, unfortunately. I remember the headline in the Daily News that said, “Ford to New York: Drop Dead.” I think it’s very important that our cities know that they have a partner in the federal government. Quite often Congress has passed laws in the past designed to help people with uh – the ownership of homes and with the control of crime and with adequate health care and education programs and so forth. Uh – those uh programs were designed to help those who need it most. And quite often this has been in the very poor people and neighborhoods in the downtown urban centers. Because of the uh – great -ly- greatly uh – advantaged uh – tho- per – persons who live in the suburbs, better education, better organization, more articulate, more aware of what the laws are, quite often this money has been channeled out of the downtown centers where it’s needed. Also I favor all revenue sharing money being used for local governments, and also to remove prohibitions in the use of revenue sharing money so that it can be used to improve education, and health care. We have now uh – for instance only 7 percent of the total education cost being financed by the federal government. When uh – the Nixon-Ford Administration started, this was 10 percent. That’s a 30 percent reduction in the portion that the federal government contributes to education in just eight years. And as you know, the education cost has gone up uh – tremendously. The last point is that the major – uh thrust has gotta be to put people back to work. We’ve got an extraordinarily high unemployment rate among downtown urban ghetto areas, uh – particularly among the very poor and particularly among minority groups, sometimes 50 or 60 percent. And the concentration of employment opportunities in those areas would help greatly not only to reestablish the tax base, but also to help reduce the extraordinary welfare cost. One of the major responsibilities on the shoulders of uh – New York City is to – is to finance welfare. And I favor a shifting of the welfare cost away from the local governments altogether. And over a longer period of time, let the federal government begin to absorb part of it that’s now paid by the state governments. Those things would help a great deal with the cities, but we still have a – a very serious problem there.

The uh – description just made of this administration’s record is hard to uh – recognize. I think it’s accurate to say that Mr. Ford voted against the uh – Voting Rights Acts and the uh – Civil Rights Acts in their uh – debative stage I think once it was assured they were going to pass he finally voted for it. This country uh – changed drastically in 1969 when the uh – terms of John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson were over and Richard Nixon and – and Gerald Ford became the presidents. There was a time when there was hope for those who uh – were poor and downtrodden and who were – uh elderly or who were – uh ill or who were in minority groups, but that time has been gone. I think the greatest thing that ever happened to the South was the passage of the Civil Rights Act and the opening up of opportunities – uh to black people – the chance to vote, to hold a job, to buy a house, to go to school, and to participate in public affairs. It not only liberated – uh black people but it also liberated the whites. We’ve seen uh – in many instances in recent years a minority affairs uh – section of uh Small Loan Administration, uh – Small Business Administration lend uh – a black entrepreneur just enough money to get started, and then to go bankrupt. The bankruptcies have gone up – uh in an extraordinary degree. Uh – FHA, which used to be a very responsible agency, uh – that everyone looked to to help own a home, lost six million dollars last year. There’ve been over thirteen hundred indictments in HUD, over eight hundred convictions relating just to home loans. And now the federal government has become the world’s greatest slum landlord. We’ve got a 30 percent or 40 percent unemployment rate among minority uh – young people. And there’s been no concerted effort given to the needs of those who are both poor and black, or poor and who speak a foreign language. And that’s where there’s been a great uh generation of despair, and ill health, and the lack of education, lack of purposefulness, and the lack of hope for the future. But it doesn’t take just a quiet uh – dormant uh minimum enforcement of the law. It requires an aggressive searching out and reaching out to help people who especially need it. And that’s been lacking in the last eight years.

I would not work hard to support any of those. Uh – we’ve always had, I think, a lot of constitutional amendments proposed, but the passage of them has been uh – fairly slow, and uh – few and far between. In the two-hundred-year history there’s been a very uh – cautious approach to this. We – quite often we have a transient problem. I – I’m strongly against a- abortion. I think abortion’s wrong. I don’t think the government oughta do anything to encourage abortion. But I don’t favor a constitutional amendment on the subject. But short of the constitutional amendment, and within the confines of the Supreme Court rulings, I’ll do everything I can to minimize the need for abortions with better sex education, family planning, with better adoptive procedures. I personally don’t believe that the federal government oughta finance abortions, but I – I draw the line and don’t support a constitutional amendment. However, I honor the right of people who seek the constitutional amendments on school busing, on uh – prayer in the schools and an abortion. But among those you named, I won’t actively work for the passage of any of them.

I – I think it’s accurate to say that Mr. Ford’s position on gun control has changed. Uh – earlier, uh – Mr. Levi, his uh – attorney general, put forward a gun control proposal, which Mr. Ford later, I believe, espoused, that called for the prohibition against the uh sale aw- of the uh – so-called Saturday Night Specials. And it would’ve put uh – very strict uh – uh – control over who owned a handgun. I have been a hunter all my life and happen to own both shotguns, rifles, and a handgun. And uh – the only purpose that I would see in registering uh – handguns and not long guns of any kind would be to prohibit the uh – ownership of those guns by those who’ve used them in the commission of a crime, or who uh – have been proven to be mentally incompetent to own a gun. I believe that limited approach to the – to the question would be uh – advisable, and – and I think, adequate. But that’s as far as I would go with it.

While I was governor of Georgia, although I’m not a lawyer, we had complete reform of the Georgia court system. We uh – streamlined the structure of the court, put in administrative officers, put a unified court system in, required that all uh – severe sentences be reviewed far uniformity. And, in addition to that put forward a proposal that was adopted and used throughout my own term of office of selection of – for all judges and district attorneys or prosecuting attorneys, on the basis of merit. Every time I had a vacancy on the Georgia Supreme Court – and I filled five of those vacancies out of seven total and about half the court of appeals judges, about 35 percent of the trial judges – I was given from an objective panel the five most highly qualified persons in Georgia. And from those five, I always chose the first one or second one. So merit selection of judges is the most important single criterion. And I would institute the same kind of procedure as president, not only in judicial appointments, but also in diplomatic appointments. Secondly, I think that the Burger Court has fairly well confirmed the major and – and most far-reaching and most controversial decisions of the Warren Court. Civil rights – uh has been confirmed by the Burger Court, hasn’t been uh – reversed, and I don’t think there’s any inclination to reverse those basic decisions. The one-man, one-vote rule, which is a very important one that uh – s- struck down the unwarranted influence in the legislature of parsley – uh populated areas of – of the states. The uh – right of indigent or very poor accused persons to uh – legal counsel. Uh – I think the Burger Court has confirmed that basic and very controversial decision of the Warren Court. Also the – the protection of an arrested person against unwarranted persecution in trying to get a false uh – confession. But now I think there have been a couple of instances where the Burger Court has made technical rulings where an obviously guilty person was later found to be guilty. And I think that in that case uh – some of the more liberal uh – members of the uh – so-called Warren Court agreed with those decisions. But the only uh – thing I uh – have pointed out was, what I’ve just said, and that there was a need to clarify the technicalities so that you couldn’t be forced to release a person who was obviously guilty just because of a – of a small technicality in the law. And – and that’s a reversal of position uh by the Burger Court with which I do agree.

Okay, I thought I answered it by saying that it would be on the basis of merit. Once the uh – search and analysis procedure had been completed, and once I’m given a list of the five or seven or ten uh – best qualified persons in the country, I would make a selection from among those uh – persons. If the uh – list was, uh – in my opinion, fairly uniform, if there was no outstanding person, then I would undoubtedly choose someone who would most accurately reflect my own basic politi- political philosophy as best I could determine it. Which would be uh – to continue the progress that has been made under the last two uh – courts – the Warren Court and the Burger Court. I would also like to uh – completely revise our criminal justice system – to do some of the things at the federal level in court reform that I’ve just described, as has been done in Georgia and other states. And then I would like to appoint people who would be interested in helping with that. I know that uh Chief Justice Burger is. He hasn’t had help from the administration, from the Congress, to carry this out. The uh – emphasis, I think, of the – of the court system uh – should be to interpret the uh – the Constitution and the laws uh – equally between property protection and personal protection. But when there’s uh – a very narrow decision – which quite often there’s one that reaches the Supreme Court – I think the choice should be with human rights. And uh – that would be another factor that I would follow.

With all due respect to President Ford, I think he ought to be ashamed of mentioning that statement, because we have the highest unemployment rate now than we had at any time between the Great Depression caused by Herbert Hoover and the time President Ford took office. We’ve got seven and a half million people out of jobs. Since he’s been in office, two and a half million more American people have lost their jobs. In the last four months alone, five hundred thousand Americans have gone on the unemployment roll. In the last month, we’ve had a net loss of one hundred and sixty-three thousand jobs. Anybody who says that the inflation rate is in good shape now ought to talk to the housewives. One of the overwhelming results that I’ve seen in the polls is that people feel that you can’t plan anymore. There’s no way to make a prediction that my family might be able to own a home or to put my kid through college. Savings accounts are losing money instead of gaining money. Inflation is robbing us. Under the present administration – Nixon’s and Ford’s – we’ve had three times the inflation rate that we experienced under President Johnson and President Kennedy. The economic growth is less than half today what it was at the beginning of this year. And housing starts – he compares the housing starts with last year. I don’t blame him, because in 1975 we had fewer housing starts in this country, fewer homes built, than any year since 1940. That’s thirty-five years. And we’ve got a 35 percent unemployment rate in many areas of this country among construction workers. And Mr. Ford hasn’t done anything about it. And I think this shows a callous indifference to the families that have suffered so much. He has vetoed bills passed by Congress within the congressional budget guidelines job opportunities for two million Americans. We’ll never have a balanced budget, we’ll never meet the needs of our people, we’ll never control the inflationary spiral, as long as we have seven and a half or eight million people out of work, who are looking for jobs. And we’ve probably got two and a half more million people who are not looking for jobs any more, because they’ve given up hope. That is a very serious indictment of this administration. It’s probably the worst one of all.

Well, that’s not exactly an accurate description of what happened. When I was that far ahead, it was immediately following the Democratic Convention, and before the Republican Convention. At that time, uh – 25 or 30 percent of the Reagan supporters said that they would not support President Ford. But as occurred at the end of the con- Democratic Convention, the Republican Party unified itself. And I think immediately following the Republican Convention, there was about a ten-point spread. I believe that to be accurate, I had 49 percent; President Ford, 39 percent. Uh – the polls uh – are good indications of fluctuations, but they vary widely one from another. And the only poll I’ve ever followed is the one that uh – you know, is taken on election day. I was in uh – thirty primaries in the spring, and uh – at first it was obvious that I didn’t have any standing in the poll. As a matter of fact, I think when Gallup ran their first poll in December of 1975 they didn’t put my name on the list. They had thirty-five people on the list. My name wasn’t even there. And at the beginning of the year I had about 2 percent. So the polls to me are interesting, but they don’t determine, you know, my hopes or – or my despair. I campaign among people. I’ve never depended on powerful political figures to put me in office. I have a direct relationship with hundreds of people around – hundreds of thousands around the country who actively campaign for me. In Georgia alone, for instance, I got 84 percent of the vote, and I think there were fourteen people uh – in addition to myself on the ballot, and Governor Wallace had been very strong in Georgia. That’s an overwhelming support from my own people who know me best. And today, we have about five hundred Georgians at their own expense – just working people who believe in me – spread around the country uh – involved in the political campaign. So, the polls are interesting, but uh – I don’t know how to explain the fluctuation. I think a lot of it uh – depends on current events – uh – sometimes foreign affairs, sometimes domestic affairs. But I think our hold uh – of support among those who uh – are crucial to the election has been fairly steady. And my success in the primary season was, I think, notable for a newcomer, from someone who’s from outside Washington, who – who never has been a part of the Washington establishment. And I think that we’ll have good results uh – on November the second for myself and I hope for the country.

Thank you Barbara (barely audible). The major purpose of an election for president is to choose a leader. Someone who can analyze the depths of feeling in our country to set a standard for our people to follow, to inspire our people to reach for greatness, to correct our defects, to answer difficult questions, to bind ourselves together in a spirit of unity. I don’t believe the present administration has done that. We have been discouraged and we’ve been alienated. Sometimes we’ve been embarrassed and sometimes we’ve been ashamed. Our people are out of work, and there’s a sense of withdrawal. But our country is innately very strong. Mr. Ford is a good and decent man, but he’s in – been in office now more than eight hundred days approaching almost as long as John Kennedy was in office. I’d like to ask the American people what, what’s been accomplished. A lot remains to be done. My own background is different from his. I was a school board member, and a library board member. I served an a hospital authority. And I was in the state senate and I was governor and I’m an engineer, a Naval officer, a farmer, a businessman. And I believe we require someone who can work harmoniously with the Congress, who can work closely with the people of this country, and who can bring a new image and a new spirit to Washington. Our tax structure is a disgrace, it needs to be reformed. I was Governor of Georgia for four years. We never increased sales taxes or income tax or property tax. As a matter of fact, the year before I went out of office we gave a $50 million refund to the property taxpayers of Georgia. We spend six hundred dollars per person in this country – every man, woman and child – for health care. We still rank fifteenth among all the nations of the world in infant mortality. And our cancer rate is uh – higher than any country in the world. We don’t have good health care. We could have it. Employment ought to be restored to our people. We’ve become almost a welfare state. We spend now 700 percent more on unemployment compensation than we did eight years ago when the Republicans took over the White House. Our people wanna go back to work. Our education system can be improved. Secrecy ought to be stripped away from government and a maximum of personal privacy ought to be maintained. Our housing programs have uh – gone bad. It used to be that the average – uh family could own a house. But now less than a third of our people can afford to buy their own homes. The budget was more grossly out of balance last year than ever before in the history of our country – $65 billion – primarily because our people are not at work. Inflation is robbing us, as we’ve already discussed, and the government bureaucracy is uh – just a horrible mess. This doesn’t have to be. Now I don’t know all the answers. Nobody could. But I do know that if the president of the United States and the Congress of the United States and the people of the United States said, “I believe our nation is greater than what we are now.” I believe that if we are inspired, if we can achieve a degree of unity, if we can set our goals high enough and work toward recognized goals with industry and labor and agriculture along with government at all levels, then we can achieve great things. We might have to do it slowly. There are no magic answers to do it. But I believe together we can make great progress. We can correct our difficult mistakes and answer those very tough questions. I believe in the greatness of our country, and I believe the American people are ready for a change in Washington. We’ve been drifting too long. We’ve been dormant too long. We’ve been discouraged too long. And we have not set an example for our own people. But I believe that we can now establish in the White House a good relationship with Congress, a good relationship with our people, set very high goals for our country. And with inspiration and hard work we can achieve great things. And let the world know – that’s very important. But more importantly, let the people in our own country realize that we still live in the greatest nation on earth. Thank you very much.
