Yes. First of all is to recognize a tremendous economic strength in this country and to set the putting to – back to work of our people as a top priority. This is uh – an effort that ought to be done primarily by strong leadership in the White House, the inspiration of our people, the tapping of uh – business, agriculture, industry, labor and government at all levels to work on this uh project. We’ll never have uh – an end to the inflationary spiral, and we’ll never have a balanced budget until we get our people back to work. There are several things that can be done specifically that are not now being done. First of all, to channel research and development funds into areas that will provide uh large numbers of jobs. Secondly, we need to have a commitment in the uh private sector uh – to cooperate with government in matters like housing. Here a very small investment of taxpayer’s money – in the housing field can bring large numbers of extra jobs, and the guarantee of mortgage loans, and the uh – putting forward of uh – two-0-two programs for housing for older people and so forth to cut down the roughly 20 percent unemployment that now exists in the – in the construction industry. Another thing is to deal with our – uh needs in the central cities, where the unemployment rate is extremely high: sometimes among minority groups, or those who don’t speak English, or who’re black, or young people, or – 40 percent of the employment. Here a CCC type program would be appropriate to channel money into the ah – cha- in – in into the sharing with the private sector and also local and state governments to employ young people who are now out of work. Another very important – uh aspect of our – uh economy would be to increase production in every way possible, uh to hold down – uh taxes on individuals, and to uh shift the tax burdens onto those who have avoided paying taxes in the past. These uh – kinds of specific things, uh none of which are being done now, would be a great help in – in reducing uh unemployment. There is uh – uh an additional factor that needs to be done and covered very – very succinctly, and that is, to make sure that we have a good relationship between management – business on the one hand, and labor, on the other. In a > Transfer interrupted! ery high, we might channel specific uh targeted job – job – uh opportunities by paying part of the salary of unemployed people – uh and also sharing with uh – local governments the uh – payment of salaries which would uh – let us cut down the unemployment rate much lower, before we hit the inflationary level. But I believe that by the end of the first four years of uh – of the next term we could have the unemployment down to 3 percent adult unemployment, which is about uh – 4 to 4 and a half percent overall uh controlled inflation rate and have a uh balance of growth of about – uh 4 to 6 percent, around 5 percent which would give us a balanced budget.

Yes, in unemployment that is likely to create additional pressure on prices, how willing are you to consider an incomes policy, in other words, wage and price controls?

Well – we now have such uh – a low utilization of uh – our productive capacity – uh about 73 percent; I think it’s about the lowest since the Great Depression years – and such a high unemployment rate now – uh 7.9 percent – that – uh we have a long way to go in getting people to work before we have the inflationary pressures. And I think this would uh – this would be uh easy to accomplish, to get jobs down, without having strong in- inflationary pressures that – that would be necessary. I would not favor the uh – payment of uh – of a given fixed income to people unless they are not able to work. But with tax incentives for the low-income groups we could build up their uh – income levels uh – above the poverty level and not uh make welfare more uh – profitable than – than work.

Well, Mr. Ford is – is uh changing uh considerably his previous philosophy. The present tax structure is a disgrace to this country; it’s just a welfare program for the rich. As a matter of fact, uh – 25 percent of the total tax deductions, go for only 1 percent of the richest people in this country, and over 50 percent of the tax uh credits go for the 14 percent of the richest people in this country. When Mr. Ford first became president in – in August of 1974, the first thing he did in – in October was to ask for a $4.7 billion increase in taxes on our people in the midst of the heaviest recession, since uh – since the great depression of nineteen uh – of the 1940s. In uh – January of 1975 he asked for a tax change: a $5.6 billion increase on low-and-middle-income private individuals, a six and a half billion dollar decrease on the corporations and the special interests. In uh – December of uh – 1975 he vetoed the roughly 18 to 20 billion dollar uh tax-reduction bill that had been passed by the Congress, and then he came back later on in January of this year and he did advocate a $10 billion tax reduction, but it would be offset by a $6 billion increase this coming January in deductions for Social Security payments and for unemployment compensation. The whole philosophy of the Republican party, including uh – my opponent, has been to pile on taxes on low-income people to take ’em off on the corporations. As a matter fact, in – sin- since the late sixties when Mr. Nixon took office, we’ve had a reduction in uh – in the percentage of taxes paid by corporations from 30 percent down to about 20 percent. We’ve had an increase in taxes paid by individuals, payroll taxes, from14 Percent up to 20 percent. And this is what the Republicans have done to us. And this is why a tax reform is so important.

Well, as a matter of fact there is. If we assume the ah – uh – a rate of growth of our economy, equivalent to what it was during President Johnson, President Kennedy, even before the – the – the – uh wa uh – Vietnese- namese War, and if we assume that at the end of the four-year period we can cut our unemployment rate down to 4 to 4 and a half percent – under those circumstances, even assuming no elimination of unnecessary programs and assuming an increase in the ad- in the allotment of money to finance programs, increasing as the inflation rate does – my economic projections, I think confirmed by the House uh – and the Senate committees, have been with the $60 billion extra amount of money that can be spent in fiscal year ’81 which will be the last year of this next term. Within that sixty-billion dollars increase there would be fit the programs that I promised the American people. I might say too, that – that if we see that these goals cannot be reached – and I believe they’re reasonable goals – then I would cut back on the rate of implement- implementation of new programs in order to accommodate a balanced budget by fiscal year ’81 which is the last year of the next term. I believe that we ought to have a balanced budget during normal economic circumstances. And uh – these projections have been very carefully made. I stand behind them. And if they should be in error slightly on the down side, then I’ll phase in the programs that we’ve uh – advocated, more slowly.

Well, the uh – the assumption that – that you uh – have described as different is in the rate of growth of our economy.

I believe that it’s accurate to say that – that the – that the committees to whom you refer with the – the employment that you uh – state, and with the 5 to 5 and a half percent growth rate in our economy, that the uh – projections would be a uh – a $60 billion increase in the amount of money that we’d have to spend in l981 compared to now. And uh – with that uh – in that framework would befit the – any improvements in the programs. Now this does not include uh – any uh – uh extra control over uh unnecessary spending, the weeding out of obsolete or obsolescent programs. Uh – we’ll have uh – a safety version built in with complete reorganization of the executive branch of government which I am pledged to do. The present bureaucratic structure of the – of the Federal Government is a mess. And if I’m elected president that’s gonna be a top priority of mine to completely revise the structure of the federal government, to make it economical, efficient, purposeful and manageable for a change. And also, I’m going to institute zero-based budgeting which I used four years in Georgia, which uh – assesses every program every year, and eliminates those programs that are obsolete or obsolescent. But with these projections, we will have a balanced budget by fiscal year 1981, if I’m elected president. Keep my promises to the American people. And it’s just predicated on very modest, but I think accurate, projections of employment increases and uh – a growth in our national economy equal to what was experienced under Kennedy, Johnson, before the Vietnam War.

Well I think it’s uh… very difficult for President Ford to uh – explain the difference between the pardon of President Nixon and – and uh – his attitude toward those who violated the draft laws. As a matter of fact – now- I don’t advocate amnesty; I advocate pardon. There’s a difference in my opinion – uh and in accordance with the ruling of the Supreme Court and accordance with the definition in the dictionary. Amnesty means that – that you uh – that what you did was right. Pardon means that what you did, whether it’s right or wrong, you’re forgiven for it. And I do advocate a pardon for – for draft evaders. I think it’s accurate to say that in uh – two years ago when Mr. Nixon – Mr. Ford put in this uh amnesty that three times as many deserters were uh – excused as were – as were the uh – the ones who evaded the draft. But I think that now is the time to heal our country after the Vietnam War and I think that what the people are concerned about is not the – uh pardon or the amnesty of uh – those who evaded the draft, but – but whether or not our crime system is – is fair. We’ve got a – a sharp distinction drawn between white collar crime – the – the – the big shots who are rich, who are influential uh very seldom go to jail; those who are poor and – and who have uh no influence – uh quite often are the ones who are punished. And – and the whole uh subject of crime is one that concerns our people very much, and I believe that the fairness of it is – is what – uh – is a – is a major problem that addresses our – our leader and this is something that hasn’t been addressed adequately by – by this administration. But I – I hope to have a complete uh responsibility on my shoulders to help bring about a – a fair uh – criminal justice system and also to – to bring about uh – an end to the – to the divise- divisiveness that has occurred in our country uh as a result of the Vietnam War.

Well, I’ve been through this before, Mr. Gannon, as the governor of Georgia. When I took aver we had uh a bureaucratic mess, like we have in Washington now, and we had three hundred agencies, departments, bureaus, commissions – uh some uh – fully budgeted, some not, but all having responsibility to carry out that was in conflict. And we cut those three hundred – uh agencies and so forth down substantially. We eliminated two hundred and seventy-eight of them. We set up a simple structure of government that could be administrated fairly and it was a – a tremendous success. It hasn’t been undone since I was there. It resulted also in an ability to reshape our court system, our prison system, our education system, our mental health programs and – and a clear assignment of responsibility and – and authority and also to have uh our people once again understanding control our government. I intend to do the same thing if I’m elected president. When I get to Washington, coming in as an outsider, one of the major responsibilities that – that I will have on my shoulder is a complete reorganization of the – of the executive branch of government. We now have uh – a greatly expanded White House staff. When Mr. Nixon went in office, for instance, we had three and a half million dollars spent on – on the White House and its staff. That has escalated now to sixteen and a half million dollars, in the last uh Republican administration. This needs to be changed. We need to put the responsibilities back on the cabinet members. We also need to have a great reduction in agencies and programs. For instance, we now have uh – in the health area three hundred and two different programs administered by eleven major departments and agencies, sixty other advisory commissions responsible for this. Medicaid’s in one agency; Medicare is in a different one. The – the check on the quality of health care is in a different one. None of them uh are responsible for health care itself. This makes it almost impossible for us to have a good health program. We have uh – just advocated uh – this past week a consolidation of the responsibilities for energy. Our country now has no comprehensive energy program or policy. We have twenty different agencies in the federal government responsible for the production, the regulation, the uh – information about energy, the conservation of energy, spread all over government. This is a – a gross waste of money, so tough, competent management of government, giving us a simple efficient purposeful and manageable government would be a great step forward and if I’m elected – and I intend to be – then it’s gonna be done.

I can’t say for sure that we would have fewer federal employees when I go out of office than when I come in. It took me about three years to completely reorganize the Georgia government. The last year I was in office uh – our budget was – was actually less than it was a year before, uh which showed a great uh improvement. Also, we had a – a 2 percent increase in the number of employees the last year. But it was a tremendous shift from administrative jobs into the delivery of services. For instance, we uh – completely revised our prison system. We established eighty-four new mental health treatment centers. And we shifted people out of administrative jobs into the field to deliver better services. The same thing will be done uh – at the federal government level. I – I accomplished this with s – substantial reductions in employees in some departments. For instance, in the Transportation Department uh we had uh – we cut back about 25 percent of the total number of employees. In giving our people better mental health care, we increased the number of employees. But the efficiency of it, the simplicity of it, the uh ability of people to understand their own government and control it was a – was a uh – substantial benefit derived from complete reorganization. We uh – have got to do that at the federal government level. If we don’t, the bureaucratic mess is going to continue. There’s no way for our people now to understand what their government is. There’s no way to get the answer to a question. When you come to Washington to try to – as a governor – to try to begin a new program for your people, like uh the treatment of drug addicts, I found there were thirteen different federal agencies that I had to go to, to manage the uh drug treatment program. In the Georgia government we only had one agency responsible for drug treatment. This is the kind of change that would be made. And uh – it would be of – of tremendous benefit in long-range planning, in tight budgeting, uh saving the taxpayers’ money, making the government more efficient, cutting down on bureaucratic waste, having a clear delineation of authority and responsibility of employees, and giving our people a better chance to understand and control their government.

Well, Mr. Ford takes the uh – same attitude that the Republicans always take. In the last three months before an election, they’re always for the programs that they always fight the other three-and-one-half years. Uh – I remember when uh – Herbert Hoover was against uh – jobs for people. I remember when Alf Landon was against Social Security and uh – later President Nixon, sixteen years ago, was telling the public that John Kennedy’s proposals would bankrupt the country and would double the cost. The best thing to do is to look at the record uh – of Mr. Ford’s Administration and Mr. Nixon’s before his. Uh – we had last year a $65 billion deficit – the largest deficit in the history of our country – more of a deficit spending than we had in the entire eight-year period under President Johnson and President Kennedy. We’ve got five hundred thousand more Americans out of jobs today than were out of work three months ago and since Mr. Ford’s been in office two years, we’ve had a 50 percent increase in unemployment from five million people out of work to two and a half million more people out of work and a total of seven and a half million. We’ve also got uh – a comparison between himself and Mr. Nixon. He’s got four times the size of the deficits that Mr. Nixon even had himself. This uh – talking about more people at work – uh is distorted because with a 14 percent increase in the cost of living in the last uh – two years, it means that – that women and young people have had to go to work when they didn’t want to because their fathers didn’t make enough to pay the increased cost of uh – food and uh housing and clothing. We have uh – in this last uh two years alone a hundred and twenty billion dollars total deficits under President Ford and uh – at the same time we’ve had, in the last eight years, a doubling in the number of bankruptcies for small business: we’ve had a negative growth in our – in our national economy measured in real dollars. The take-home pay of a worker in this country is actually less now than it was in 1968 – measured in real dollars. This is the kind of record that’s there and talk about the future and a drastic change or conversion on the part of Mr. Ford as of last minute is one that just doesn’t go.

Well among my other experiences in the past, I’ve – I’ve been a nuclear engineer, and did graduate work in this field. I think I know the – the uh capabilities and limitations of atomic power. But the energy – uh policy of our nation is one that uh has not yet been established under this administration. I think almost every other developed nation in the world has an energy policy except us. We have seen uh – the Federal Energy Agency established, for instance. Uh – in the crisis of 1973 it was supposed to be a temporary agency, uh now it’s permanent, it’s enormous, it’s growing every day. I think the Wall Street Journal uh reported not too long ago they have a hundred and twelve public relations experts working for the Federal Energy Agency to try to justify to the American people its own existence. We’ve got to have a – a firm way to handle the energy question. The reorganization proposal that I have put forward is one uh first step. In addition to that, we need to have – uh a realization that we’ve got uh about thirty-five years worth of oil left in the whole world. We’re gonna run out of oil. When Mr. Nixon made his famous uh speech on Operation Independence we were importing about 35 percent of our oil. Now we’ve increased that amount 25 percent. We now import about 44 percent of our oil. We need to shift from oil to coal. We need to concentrate our research and development effort on uh coal burning and extraction, with safer mines, but also it’s clean burning. We need to shift very strongly toward solar energy and have strict conservation measures. And then as a last resort only, continue to use atomic power. I would certainly uh – not cut out atomic power altogether. We can’t afford to give up that opportunity until later. But to the extent that we continue to use atomic power, I would be responsible as president to make sure that the safety precautions were initiated and maintained. For instance, some that have been forgotten; we need to have the reactor core – below ground level, the entire power plant that uses atomic uh – power tightly sealed and a heavy – heavy vacuum maintained. There ought to be a standardized design. There ought to be a full-time uh – atomic energy specialist, independent of the power company in the control room, full time, twenty-four hours a day, to shut down a plant if an abnormality develops. These kinds of uh – procedures, along with evacuation procedures, adequate insurance, ought to be initiated. So, shift from oil to coal, emphasize research and development on coal use and also on solar power, strict conservation measures, not yield every time that the special interest groups uh – put pressure on the president like uh this administration has done, and use atomic energy only as a last resort with the strictest possible safety precautions. That’s the best overall energy policy in the brief time we have to discuss it.

Yes, I would. Some of the things that can be done about this is a change in the rate structure of electric power companies. We uh – now encourage people to waste electricity, and uh – by giving uh – the lowest rates to the biggest users. We don’t do anything to cut down on peak load requirements. We don’t have an adequate requirement for the insulation of homes, for the efficiency of automobiles. And whenever the uh – automobile manufacturers come forward and say they can’t meet the uh – amendments that the Congress has put forward, this Republican administration has delayed the implementation dates. In addition to that, we ought to have a – a shift toward the use of coal, particularly in the Appalachian regions where the coal is located. A lot of uh – very high quality, low-carbon coal, uh – low-sulfur coal is there, it’s where our employment is needed. Uh – this would – would help a great deal. So mandatory conservation measures – yes. Encouragement by the president for people to uh voluntarily conserve – yes. And also the private sector ought to be encouraged to – to bring forward to the public the benefits from efficiency. One bank in uh – Washington, fo- for instance, gives lower interest loans for people who adequately insulate their homes or who buy efficient automobiles. And some major uh – uh – manufacturing companies, like Dow Chemical, have through uh – very effective efficiency mechanism cut down the use of energy by uh – as much as 40 percent with the same out-product. These kinds of things uh – ought to be done, uh they ought to be encouraged and supported, and even required uh by the government, yes.

Well, Mr. Ford doesn’t seem to put into perspective the fact that when – when uh five hundred thousand more people are out of work than there were three months ago, while we have two and a half million more people out of work than were when he took office, that this touches human beings. I was in uh – a city in uh – Pennsylvania not too long ago, near here, and uh – there were about four or five thousand people in the audience – it was on a – on a train trip. And I said, “How many uh – adults here are out of work?” About a thousand raised their hands. Mr. Ford uh – actually has fewer people now in the private sector in non-farm jobs than when he took office. And still he talks about – uh success. Seven point nine percent unemployment is a terrible tragedy in this country. He says he’s learned how to match unemployment with inflation. That’s right. We’ve got the highest inflation we’ve had in twenty-five years right now, except under this administration, and that was fifty years ago. And we’ve got uh – the highest unemployment we’ve had uh – under Mr. Ford’s administration, since the Great Depression. This affects human beings, and – and his insensitivity in providing those people a chance to work has made this a welfare administration, and not a work administration. He hasn’t saved $9 billion with his vetoes. There’s only been uh – a net savings of $4 billion. And the cost in unemployment compensation, welfare compensation, and lost revenues has increased $23 billion in the last two years. This is a – a typical attitude that really causes havoc in people’s lives, and then it’s covered over by saying that our country has naturally got a 6 percent unemployment rate, or 7 percent unemployment rate and a 6 percent inflation. It’s a travesty. It shows a lack of leadership. And we’ve never had a president since the War between the States that vetoed more bills. Mr. Ford has vetoed four times as many bills as Mr. Nixon – per year. And eleven of ’em have been overridden. One of his bills that was overridden – he only got one vote in the Senate and seven votes in the House, from Republicans.

Right.

Now we have uh such a grossly unbalanced tax system – as I said earlier, that it is a disgrace – ah of all the tax – benefits now, 25 percent of ’em go to the 1 percent of the richest people in this country. Over 50 percent – 53 to be exact – percent of the tax benefits go to the 14 percent richest people in this country, and we’ve had a 50 percent increase in payroll deductions since Mr. Nixon went in office eight years ago. Mr. Ford has – has advocated since he’s been in office over $5 billion in reductions for corporations, special interest groups, and the very, very wealthy who derive their income – not from labor – but from investments. That’s got to be changed. A few things that can be done: we have now a deferral system so that the multinational corporations who invest overseas – if they make a million dollars in profits overseas – they don’t have to pay any of their taxes unless they bring their money back into this country. When they don’t pay their taxes, the average American pays the taxes for them. Not only that, but it robs this country of jobs, because instead of coming back with that million dollars and creating a shoe factory, say in New Hampshire or Vermont, if the company takes the money down to Italy and – and builds a shoe factory, they don’t have to pay any taxes on the money. Another thing is a system called DISC which was originally designed, proposed by Mr. Nixon, to encourage exports. This permits a company to create uh – a dummy corporation, to export their products, and then not to pay the full amount of taxes on them. This costs our uh – government about uh – $1.4 billion a year. And when those rich corporations don’t pay that tax, the average American taxpayer pays it for ’em. Another one that’s uh – that’s very important is the uh – is the business deductions, uh – jet airplanes, uh – first class travel, the fifty-dollar martini lunch. The average working person can’t – uh – can’t take advantage of that, but the – the wealthier people – uh can. Uh – another system is where uhh – a dentist can invest money in say, raising cattle and uh – can put in a hundred thousand dollars of his own money, borrow nine hundred thousand dollars – nine hundred mi- thousand dollars – that makes a million – and mark off a great amount of uh – of loss uh – through that procedure. Uh – there was one example, for instance, where uh – somebody uh – produced pornographic movies. They put in $30 thousand of their own money and got a hundred and twenty thousand dollars in tax savings. Well, these special kinds of programs have – have robbed the average taxpayer and have benefited those who are powerful, and who can employ lobbyists, and who can have their CPAs and their lawyers to help them benefit from the roughly uh – eight thousand pages of the tax code. The average uh American person can’t do it. You can’t hire a lobbyist uh out of unemployment compensation checks.

Yes. You need about, according to Congressional committees on this, you need about $10 billion. Now you listed some things – the uh – deferral on foreign income as estimated: that would save about $500 million. DISC, you said, was about 1.4 billion. uh – The estimate of the outside, if you eliminated all tax shelters, is 5 billion. So where else would you raise the revenue to provide this tax relief – would you, in fact, do away with all business deductions, and what other kinds of preferences would you do away with?

No, I wouldn’t do away with all – uh business deductions. I think that would be a – a very serious mistake. But uh – if – if you could just do away with the ones that are unfair, you could lower taxes for everyone. I would never do anything that would increase the taxes for those who work for a living, or who are presently required to list all their income. What I wanna do is not to raise taxes, but to eliminate loopholes. And this is uh – the point of my first statistics that I gave you – that – that the present tax benefits that have been carved out over a long period of years – fifty years – by sharp tax lawyers and by lobbyists have benefited just the rich. These programs that I described to you earlier – the tax deferrals for overseas, the DISC, and the tax shelters, uh – they only apply to people in the $50 thousand-a-year bracket or up, and I think this is the very best way to approach it. It’s to make sure that everybody pays taxes on the income that they earn and make sure that you take whatever savings there is from the higher income levels and give it to the lower- and middle-income families.

Well, it’s not a matter of uh – Republican and Democrat. It’s a matter of leadership or no leadership. President Eisenhower worked with a Democratic Congress very well. Even President Nixon, because he was a strong leader at least, worked with a Democratic Congress very well. Uh – Mr. Ford has vetoed, as I said earlier, four times as many bills per year as Mr. Nixon. Mr. Ford quite often puts forward a program just as a public relations stunt, and never tries to put it through the Congress by working with the Congress. I think under presidents For- uh – Nixon and Eisenhower they passed about 60 to 75 percent of their legislation. This year Mr. Ford will not pass more than 26 percent of all the legislative proposals he puts forward. This is government by stalemate, and we’ve seen almost a complete breakdown in the proper relationship between the president, who represents this country, and the Congress, who collectively also represent this country. We’ve had uh – Republican presidents before who’ve tried to run against a Democratic – uh Congress. And I don’t think it’s uh – the Congress is Mr. Ford’s opponent; but if uh – if – if he insists that uh – that I be responsible for the Democratic Congress, of which I’m – have not been a part, then I think it’s only fair that he be responsible for the Nixon administration in its entirety, of which he was a part. That, I think, is a good balance. But the point is, that – that a president ought to lead this country. Mr. Ford, so far as I know, except for avoiding another Watergate, has not accomplished one single major program for this country. And there’s been a constant squabbling between the president and the Congress, and that’s not the way this country ought to be run. I might go back to one other thing. Mr. Ford has uh – misquoted an AP uh – news story that was in error to begin with. That story reported several times that I would lower taxes for low and middle-income families and uh – that correction was delivered to the White House and I am sure that the president knows about this uh – correction, but he still insists uh – on repeating an erroneous statement.

What I have said is that the president ought to have a chance to appoint a chairman of the Federal Reserve Board to have a coterminous uh term; in other words, both of ’em serve the same four – four years. The Congress can modify the supply of money by modifying the income uh tax laws. The president can modify the uh – economic structure of a country by public statements and general attitudes in the budget that he proposes. The Federal Reserve has uh – an independent status that ought to be preserved; I think that Mr. uh – Burns did take a typical, erroneous Republican attitude in the 1973 year when inflation was so high. They assumed that the uh – inflation rate was because of excessive demand and uh – therefore put into effect tight constraint on the economy, very high interest rates, which is typical also of the Republican administration, uh – tried to increase the uh – the tax uh – payments by individuals, and cut the tax payments by corporations. I would have uh – done it opposite. I think the uh – problem should’ve been addressed by increasing productivity, by having uh – put – put people back to work so they could purchase more goods, lower income taxes on individuals, perhaps raise them, if necessary, on corporations in comparison. But uh – Mr. Burns uh – in that respect made a very serious mistake. I would not wanna destroy the – the independence of the uh Federal Reserve – uh Board. But I do think we ought to have a cohesive economic policy with at – at least the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board and the president’s terms being uh – the same and letting the Congress, of course, be the third uh – entity with uh – with independence subject only to the president’s veto.

Well, one of the very serious things that’s happened in our government in recent years, and has continued up until now, is a breakdown in the trust among our people in the [twenty-seven-minute delay]

There has been too much government secrecy and not uh – not enough respect for the personal privacy of American citizens.

Well, tonight we’ve had a chance to talk a lot about the past. But I think it’s time to talk about the future. Our nation in the last eight years has been divided as never before. It’s a time for unity. It’s a time to draw ourselves together: to have a president and a Congress that can work together with mutual respect for a change, cooperating for a change, in the open for a change, so the people can understand their own government. It’s time for government, industry, labor, manufacturing, agriculture, education, other entities in our society to cooperate. And it’s a time for government to understand and to cooperate with our people. For a long time our American citizens have been excluded, sometimes misled, sometimes have been lied to. This is uh – not compatible with the purpose of our nation. I believe in our country. It needs to be competent. The government needs to be well-managed, efficient, economical, We need to have a government that’s sensitive to our people’s needs – to those who are poor, who don’t have adequate health care, who have been cheated too long with our tax programs, who’ve been out of jobs, whose families have been torn apart. We need to restore the faith and the trust of the American people in their own government. In addition to that, we’ve suffered because we haven’t had leadership in this administration. We’ve got a government of stalemate. We’ve lost the vision of what our country can and ought to be. This is not the America that we’ve known in the past. It’s not the America that we have to have in the future. I don’t claim to know all the answers. But I’ve got confidence in my country. Our economic strength is still there. Our system of government – in spite of Vietnam, Cambodia, CIA, Watergate – is still the best system of government on earth. And the greatest resource of all are the two hundred and fifteen million Americans who have within us the strength, the character, the intelligence, the experience, the patriotism, the idealism, the compassion, the sense of brotherhood on which we can rely in the future to restore the greatness to our country We ought not to be excluded from our government anymore. We need a president who can go in – who derives his strength from the people. I owe the special interests nothing. I owe everything to you, the people of this country. And I believe that we can bind our wounds. I believe that we can work together. And I believe that if we can tap the tremendous untapped reservoir of innate strength in this country, that we can once again have a government as good as our people, and let the world know what we still know and hope for – that we still live in the greatest and the strongest and the best country on earth.
