Well, I don’t think there’s a great difference, Mr. Mashek, between my views and President Reagan’s. One of the reasons I think we’re an effective team is that I believe firmly in his leadership. He’s really turned this country around. We agree on the economic program. When we came into office, why, inflation was 21, 12 1/2 percent interest was wiping out every single American were 21 1/2 percent if you can believe it. Productivity was down. Savings was down. There was despair. In fact, the leadership of the country told the people that there was a malaise out there. And this president turned it around and I’ve been with him every step of the way. And of course I would continue those kinds of programs because it’s brought America back. America’s better off. People are going back to work. And why Mr. Monad can’t understand that there’s a new enthusiasm in this country, that America is back, there’s new strong leadership, I don’t know. He has one answer to the problem. Raise everybody’s taxes. He looked right into that lens and he said out there in San Francisco, he said, “I’m gonna raise your taxes.” Well he’s had a lot of experience in that and he’s sure gonna go ahead and do it. But I remember a statement of Lyndon Johnson’s when he was looking around, why his party people weren’t supporting him, and he said, “Hey, they painted their tails white and they ran with the antelopes.” There’s a lot of Democratic white tails running with the antelopes. Not one single Democrat has introduced the Mondale tax bill into the Congress. Of course I support the president’s economic program and I support him in everything else. And I’m not sure, because of my concept of the vice presidency, that if I didn’t, I’d go doing what Mr. Mondale has done with Jimmy Carter; jump away from him. I couldn’t do that to Ronald Reagan, now, next year or any other time. I have too much trust in him. I have too much friendship for him. And I’d feel very uncomfortable doing that.

I owe my president my judgment and then I owe him loyalty. You can’t have the president of the United States out there looking over his shoulder wondering whether his vice president is going to be supporting him. Mrs. Ferraro has quite a few differences with Vice-President Mondale and I understood it when she changed her position on tuition tax credits. They’re different on busing; she voted to extend the grain embargo; he now says that he was against it. If they win – and I hope they don’t – but if they win, she’ll have to accommodate some views. But she’ll give him the same kind of loyalty that I’m giving President Reagan. One, we’re not far apart on anything. Two, I can walk into that Oval Office anytime and give him my judgment and he might agree or he might not. But he also knows I won’t be talking about it to the press or I won’t be knifing him in the back by leaking to make me look good and complicate the problems of the president of the United States.

Well, I was glad to get that vote of confidence from Mrs. Ferraro in my economic judgment. So let me make a statement on the economy. The other clay she was in a plant and she said to the workers, Why are you all voting for, why are so many of you voting for the Reagan-Bush ticket. And there was a long, deathly silence and she said come on, we delivered. That’s the problem. And I’m not blaming her except for the liberal voting record in the House. They delivered. They delivered 21 Â® percent interest rates. They delivered what they called malaise. They delivered interest rates that were right off the charts. They delivered take-home pay, checks that were shrinking, and we’ve delivered optimism. People are going back to work; 6 million of them. And 300,000 jobs a month being created. That’s why there was that deathly silence out there in that plant. They delivered the wrong thing. Ronald Reagan is delivering leadership.

No, Mr. White, I think our record on civil rights is a good record. You mentioned the Voting Rights extension; it was extended for the longest period of time by President Reagan. But we have some problems in attracting the black vote, and I think our record deserves better. We have done more for black colleges than any previous administration. We favor enterprise zones to give – and it’s been blocked by Tip O’Neill and that House of Representatives, those liberals in that House blocked a new idea to bring jobs into the black communities across the country. And because it’s not an old handout, special federal spending program, it’s blocked there – a good idea. And I’d like to sec that tried. We’ve brought more civil rights cases in the Justice Department than the previous administration by far. We believe in trying something new to help these black teenage kids; the minimum wage differential that says, “Look,” to an employer, “hire these guys. And, yes, they’re willing to work for slightly less than the minimum wage. Give ’em a training job in the private sector.” We threw out that old CETA that didn’t train people for jobs that existed, simply rammed them onto the government payroll, and we put in a thing called the Job Training Partnership Act. Wonderful new legislation that’s helping blacks more and more. We think of civil rights as something like crime in your neighborhoods. And, for example, when crime figures are going in the right direction that’s good, that’s a civil right. Similarly, we think of it in terms of quality of life, and that means interest rates. You know, it’s funny, Mr. Mondale talks about real interest rates. The real interest rate is what you pay when you go down and try to buy a TV set or buy a car, or do whatever it is. The interest rates when we left office were 21% percent. Inflation! Is it a civil right to have the going right off the chart so you’re busting every American family, those who can afford it the least? No, we’ve got a good record. We’ve got it on civil rights legislation, minority set-asides, more help for black colleges, and we’ve got it in terms of an economy that’s offering people opportunity and hope instead of despair.

Mr. White, it’s not trickling down. And I’m not suggesting there’s no poverty, but I am suggesting the way to work out of poverty is through real opportunity. And in the meantime, the needy are getting more help. Human resource spending is way, way up. Aid for Dependent Children spending is up. Immunization programs are up. Almost every place you can point, contrary to Mr. Mondale’s – I gotta be careful – but contrary of how he goes around just saying everything bad. If somebody sees a silver lining, he finds a big black cloud out there. Whine on harvest moon! I mean, there’s a lot going on, a lotta opportunity.

Well, maybe we have a factual – maybe we can ask the experts to go to the books. They’ll do it anyway. Spending for food stamps is way, way up under the Reagan administration, AFDC is up under the Reagan administration, and I’m not going to be found wrong on that. I am sure of my facts, and we are trying to help and I think we’re doing a reasonable job, but we are not going to rest until every single American that wants a job and until this prosperity and this recovery that’s benefiting many Americans, benefits all Americans.

I do believe in pluralism. I do believe in separation of church and state. I don’t consider abortion a religious issue. I consider it a moral issue. I believe the archbishop has every right to do everything he wants in that direction, just as I never faulted Jesse Jackson from taking his message to the black pulpits all across this country, just as I never objected when the nuclear arms, the nuclear freeze or the antinuclear people – many of those movements were led by priests. Suddenly, because a Catholic bishop or an evangelist feels strongly on a political issue, people are saying it’s merging of church and state. We favor – and I speak confidently for the president – we favor separation of church and state. We favor pluralism. Now somebody says you ought to restore prayer in schools. You don’t think it’s right to prohibit a kid from praying in schools. For years kids were allowed to pray in schools. We don’t think that’s a merger of church and stare to have nonmandatory voluntary, nongovernment-ordered prayer. And yet some are accusing us of injecting religion into politics. I have no problem with what the archbishop does, and I have no problem with what the evangelists on the right do and I have no problem what the priests on the left do. And it didn’t bother me when during the Vietnam War much of the opposition to the government – Democrat and Republican governments – was led by priests, encouraging people to break the law and the adage of the – you know – the civil disobedience thing. So our position, separation of church and stare, pluralism, so no little kid with a minority religion of some sort is going to feel offended or feel left out or feel uncomfortable. But, yes, prayer in school on a voluntary basis worked for many, many years until the Supreme Court ruled differently And I’m glad we got this question because I think there’s been too much said about religion and politics. We don’t believe in denominationally moving in. It wasn’t our side that raised the question about our president whether he was a good Christian or not and so I, so that’s our position – separation of church and state, pluralism, respect for all.

You know, there has been – I have to make a confession – an evolution in my position. There’s been 15 million abortions since 1973, and I don’t take that lightly. There’s been a million and a half this year. The president and I do favor a human rights amendment. I favor one that would have an exception for incest and rape, and he doesn’t, but we both – only for the life of the mother. And I agree with him on that. So yes, my position’s evolved, but I’d like to see the American who faced with 15 million abortions isn’t rethinking his or her position and I’ll just stand with the answer. I support the president’s position – and comfortably – from a moral standpoint.

No, I support the president’s position.

Well I respect that statement, I really and truly do. We have difference on a moral question here on abortion. I notice that Mr. Mondale keeps talking in the debate and now it’s come here about Mr. Falwell. And I don’t know where this canard could have come from about Mr. Falwell picking the Supreme Court justices. Ronald Reagan has made one super outstanding, the only one he’s made, appointment to the Supreme Court and that was Sandra Day O’Connor, and Mr. Falwell opposed her nomination. We still have respect for him, but he opposed it, and so I hope this lays to rest this slander against the president. We want justices who will interpret the Constitution, not legislate it.

What that figure – and I kind of like the way Mrs. Ferraro and Mr. Zaccaro reported – because they reported federal taxes, state and local taxes – gives people a clearer picture. That year I happened to pay a lot of state and local taxes, which as you know are deducted from the other, and so I looked it up the other day, and we had paid – I think it’s 42 percent – of our gross income in taxes. Now Mr. Mondale the other night took what I – I’ll be honest – I think it was a cheap shot – at me, and we did a little looking around to see about his. We can’t find his 198I tax return – it may have been released. Maybe my opponent knows whether Mr. Mondale released it. But we did find estimates that his income for those three years is a million, four hundred thousand dollars, and I think he paid about the same percentage as I did in total taxes. He also made a reference that troubled me very much, Mr. Boyd. He started talking about my chauffeur, and you know, I’m driven to work by the Secret Service – so is Mrs. Ferraro – so is Mr. Mondale – they protected his life for four years and now they’ve done a beautiful job for Barbara and mine. They saved the life of the president of the United States. I think that was a cheap shot – telling the American people to try to divide class – rich and poor. But the big question isn’t whether Mrs. Ferraro is doing well. I think they’re doing pretty well, and I know Barbara and I are doing well. And it’s darn sure that Mr. Mondale is doing well, with a million four in income, but the question really is – after we get through this disclosure – is the tax cut fair? Are people getting a fair break, and the answer is the rich are paying 6 percent more on taxes and the poor are getting a better break. Those lower and middle-income people that have borne the burden for a long time. So yes, I favor disclosure. I’ve always disclosed. This year I had my taxes and everything I own in a blind trust – so blind – blinder than the president’s, so I didn’t even sign my tax return. But there seemed to be an interest in it so we went to the government ethics committee – they agreed to change the trust. The trust has been revealed, and I was sure glad to see that I had paid 42 percent of my gross income in taxes.

I’m really a Texan. But I got one house. And under the law, every taxpayer is allowed, when he sells a house, and buys another house, to get the rollover. Everybody, if it turns out, and I may hire, I notice she said she has a new good accountant. I’d like to get his name and phone number because I think I’ve paid too much in the way of taxes. And residence, Mr. Boyd, legal residence, for voting, is very different. And the domicile, they call that, very different, than the house. That they say you’re living in the vice-president’s house. Therefore you don’t get what every – I’ve got problems – what every other taxpayer gets. I got problems with the IRS, but so do a lot of people out there. I think I’ve paid too much. Nothing ethical. I’d like to get some money back.

No, I think I’ve said all I want to say. I do, I didn’t fully address myself to Mr. Boyd’s question no disclosure, I led the fight, I think, in 1968, in the House – I was in the House of Representatives for a couple of terms – and I led the fight for disclosure. I believe in it. Before I went into this job, I disclosed everything we had. We didn’t have any private corporations, but I disclosed absolutely everything. Arthur Andersen made out an assets and liabilities statement that I believe went further than any other one. And then, to protect the public interest, we went into this blind trust. I believe in the blind trust because I believe a public official in this kind of job ought not to know whether he’s gonna benefit, directly or indirectly, by some holding he might have or something of that nature. And, no, I support full disclosure.

Terrorism is very, very difficult to slop. And I think everybody knows that. We had ambassadors killed in Sudan and the Lebanon some time ago, a long time ago. When you see the Israeli building in Lebanon after the death of our marines you see that, hit by terrorism, the Israelis, with all their experience fighting terrorism, you know it’s difficult. When you see Khomeini wraith his radical Islam resorting to government-sponsored terrorism, it’s very difficult. The intelligence business can do a good job, and I’m always one that defends the Central Intelligence Agency. I believe we ought to strengthen it and I believe we still have the best foreign intelligence business in the world. But it is very difficult to get the source information that you need to go after something as shadowy as international terror. There was a difference between Iran and what happened in Lebanon. In Iran you had a government holding a U.S. embassy; the government sanctioning the takeover of that embassy by those students; the government negotiating with the United States government for their release. In Lebanon, in the terror that happened at the embassy, you have the government there, Mr. Gemayel, that wants to help fight against terrorism. But because of the melee in the Middle East, it’s there today and has been there yesterday and the day before, and everyone that’s had experience in that area knows, it is a very different thing. So what we’ve got to do is use absolutely the best security possible. I don’t think you can go assigning blame. The president, of course, is the best I’ve ever seen at accepting that. He’s been wonderful about it in absolutely everything that happens. But I think fair-minded people that really understand international terror know that it’s very hard to guard against. And the answer then really lies in the Middle East and terrorism happening all over the world, is a solution to the Palestine question, the follow on to Camp David under the umbrella of the Reagan September of 1982 initiative. That will reduce terror, it won’t eliminate it.

What we’ve done is to support Arab stores that want to stand up against international terror, quite different. We believe in supporting, without jeopardizing the security of Israel in any way, because they are our one strategic ally in the area, they are the one democracy in the area and our relations with them has never been better. But we do believe in reaching out to the, what they call the GCC, those Gulf Cooperative Council State, those moderate Arab states in that world, and helping them with defensive weapons to guard against international terror or radical Islam perpetuated by Khomeini. And because we’ve done that and because the Saudis chopped down a couple of those intruding airplanes a while back, I think we have helped keep the peace in the Persian Gulf.

Well, I’m surprised. I think I just heard Mrs. Ferraro say that she would do away with all covert actions, and if so, that has very serious ramifications, as the intelligence community knows. This is serious business. And sometimes it’s quiet support for a friend, and so I’ll leave that one there. But let me help you with the difference, Mrs. Ferraro, between Iran and the embassy in Lebanon. Iran – we were held by a foreign government. In Lebanon you had a wanton, terrorist action where the government opposed it. We went to Lebanon to give peace a chance, to stop the bombing of civilians in Beirut, to remove 13,000 terrorists from Lebanon – and we did. We saw the formation of a government of reconciliation and for somebody to suggest, as our two opponents have, that these men died in shame – they better not tell the parents of those young marines. They gave peace a chance. And our allies were with us – the British, the French, and the Italians.

I support what we’re doing. It was supported to the Congress and under the law. I support it. My only regret is that the aid for the contras, those people that are fighting, we call them freedom fighters. They want to see the democracy perfected in Nicaragua. Am I to understand from this assault on covert action that nowhere in the world would we do something that was considered just off base when Mrs. Ferraro said she’s never support it? Would she never support it if the violation of human rights was so great and quiet support was necessary for freedom fighters? Yes, we’re for the contras. And let me tell you another fact about the controls. Everyone that’s not for this, everyone who wants to let that Sandinista government prevail, just like that Castro did, all of that, the contras are not Somozistas. Less than 5 percent of the contras supported Somoza. These were people that wanted a revolution. These people that felt the revolution was betrayed. These are people that support human rights. Yes, we should support them.

Well, I would simply like to make the distinction again between those countries that are searching for democracy and the handful of countries that have totally violated human rights and are going the Marxist route. Ortega, the commandante who is head of the Nicaraguan Sandinistas, is an avowed Marxist. They don’t believe in the church. They don’t believe in free elections. They don’t believe in all of the values that we believe in. So it is our policy to support the democracy there, and when you have freedom fighters that want to protect that revolution, and go the democratic route, we believe in giving them support. We are for democracy in the hemisphere. We are for negotiations. $3 out of every $4 that we sent down there has been for economic aid to support the people’s chance to eat and live and be happy and enjoy life. And one-fourth only was rnilitary. You wouldn’t get that from listening to Mr. Mondale.

Yes, I can. The, you mentioned the Gromyko meeting, those were broken off under the Carter-Mondale days. There had been three separate Soviet leaders. Mr. Brezhnev, Mr. Andropov, and now Chernenko. During their, that, in three and a half years, three separate leaders. The Soviets have not been willing to talk. We are the ones that went to the table in INF. We had a good proposal, a moral proposal. Ban an entire generation of intermediate nuclear force weapons and if you won’t do that, don’t leave your allies in Europe in a monopoly position. The Soviets with 1,200 of these things, and the alliance with none. We didn’t think that’s the way to deter aggression and keep the peace. The president went, the first thing he did when he came into office was make a proposal on the most destabilizing weapons of all, START. And when the the strategic weapon and when the Soviets said, well, we don’t like that proposal, we said all right, we’ll be more flexible. I at the urging of the president went to Geneva and laid on the table a treaty to ban all chemical weapons. We don’t want them to have a monopoly. We said look, let’s come together. You come over here and see what we’re doing; we’ll go over there and see what you’re doing. But let’s save the kids of this world from chemical weapons. A brilliant proposal to get rid of all of them. And the Soviets nyet, nyet nyet. In the mutual balance force reduction to reduce conventional forces, they’re not even willing to tell us the base. Mrs. Ferraro knows that, and how many troops they have. There’s four sessions. We have had an agreement with them on the hot line. But Carter-Monad made an agreement, the Salt II agreement, but the Democratic Senate, they were a Democratic administration, the Democratic Senate wouldn’t even ratify that agreement. It was flawed, it was unverifiable and it was not good. Our president wants to reduce, not just to stop, he wants to reduce dramatically nuclear weapons. And when the Soviets know they’re going to have this strong president to deal with, and when this new administration, Mr. Chernenko, given more than a few months in office can solidify its position, then they’ll talk. But if they think the opposition, before they sit down, are going to give up the MX, give up the B-l, go for a freeze that locks in inferiority in Europe, all of these things, unilaterally, before they’re willing to talk, they may just sweat it out for four more weeks. Who knows.

No, I don’t think it’s winnable. I was quoted wrong, obviously, ’cause I never thought that. The Soviet planning, I did learn that when I was director of Central Intelligence, and I don’t think there’d be any disagreement, is based on that ugly concept. But I agree with the president: It should never be fought. Nuclear weapons should never be fought with, and that’s our approach. So, therefore, let’s encourage the Soviets to come to the table as we did at the Gromyko meeting. I wish everybody could have seen that one – the President, giving the facts to Gromyko in all of these nuclear meetings – excellent, right on top of that subject matter. And I’ll bet you that Gromyko went back to the Soviet Union saying, “Hey, listen, this president is calling the shots; we’d better move.” But do you know why I think we’ll get an agreement? Because I think it is in the interest of the Soviet Union to make it, just as it is in the United States. They’re not deterred by rhetoric. I listened to the rhetoric for two years at the United Nations. I’ve lived in a Communist country. It’s not rhetoric that decides agreements, it’s self-interest of those countries.

Well, I think there’s quite a difference between Mr. Kyprianou in Cyprus and the leader of the free world, Ronald Reagan, in terms of meeting. And the Soviet Union – the Soviet Union, the Soviet Union will meet with a lot of different people. We’ve been in very close touch with Mr. Mitterrand, Mr. Kohl, and others that have met with the leaders of the Soviet Union. But that’s quite different than meeting with the president of the United States. The Soviets say we’ll have a meeting when we think there can be progress and yet they left those talks. I’d like to correct my opponent on the walk in the woods. It was the Soviet Union that was unwilling to discuss the walk in the woods. They were the ones that gunned it down first and the record is very, very clear on that. Miss Ferraro mentioned the inflexibility of our position on strategic arms. Yes, we offered first to get rid of all those – we tried to reduce the SS-18’s and those weapons. But then we said if that’s not good enough, there is flexibility, let’s talk about the bombers and planes. So that’s a very important point in terms of negotiation.

No, I think his strategy not only was correct but is correct. You’ve got to go back where we were. Clearly, when we came into office, the American people recognized that we had slipped into positions of inferiority on various things. Some of our planes, as the president points out, were older than the pilots; ships that couldn’t go out to sea. And you had a major problem with the military. Actually, the morale wasn’t very good either. So we have had to strengthen the military and we’re well on the way to getting that job done. America is back in terms of military strength, in terms of our ability to deter aggression and keep the peace. At the same time, however, we have made proposals and proposals and proposals – sound proposals – on reducing nuclear weapons. The Strategic Arms Reduction Talks were good proposals, and it’s the Soviets who left the table. The Intermediate Nuclear Force Talks were sound talks, and I wish the Soviet Union had continued them. The chemical weapon treaty to ban all chemical weapons, it was our initiative, not the Soviets. And we wish they would think anew and move forward to verification so everybody would know whether the other side was keeping its word. But, much more important, you’d reduce the level of terror. Similarly, we’re reducing – trying to talk to them, and are talking to them, in Vienna, about conventional force reduction. We’ve talked to them about human rights. I’ve met with Mr. Andropov and Mr. Chernenko, and we mention and we try to do something about the human rights question. The suppression of Soviet Jews is absolutely intolerable and so we have to keep pushing forward on the moral grounds as well as on the arms reduction ground. But it is my view that because this president has been strong, and because we’ve addressed the imbalances – and I think we’re very close to getting that job done – the Soviets are more likely to make a deal. The Soviets made an ABM treaty when they felt we were going to deploy an ABM system. So I am optimistic for the future, once they realize that they will have this strong, principled president to negotiate with, strong leadership, and yet with demonstrable flexibility on arms control.

I have none I’d like to ask of her, but I’d sure like to use the time to talk about the World Series or something of that nature. Let me put it this way – I don’t have any questions, but we are so different from – the Reagan-Bush administration is so different from the Carter-Mondale [sic] administration that the American people are going to have the clearest choice. It’s a question of going back to the failed ideas of the past, where we came in – 21% percent on those interest rates, inflation, despair, malaise, no leadership, blaming the American people for failed leadership. Or another option – keep this recovery going until it benefits absolutely everybody. Peace at home – peace abroad – prosperity – opportunity. I’d like to hear her talk on those things, but I think the yellow light is flashing and so we’ll leave it there.

No rebuttal.

Well, in a couple of weeks, you, the American people, will be faced, three weeks, with a choice. It’s the clearest choice in some fifty years. And the choice is, do we move forward with strength and with prosperity or do we go back to weakness, despair, disrespect. Ronald Reagan and I have put our trust in the American people. We’ve moved some of the power away from Washington, D.C., and put it back with the people. We’re pulling together. The neighborhoods are safer ’cause crime is going down. Your sons and daughters are doing better in school. Test scores are going up. There’s a new opportunity lying out there in the future. Science, technology and space offering opportunity that, to everybody, all the young ones coming up. And abroad there’s new leadership and respect. And Ronald Reagan is clearly the strong leader of the free world. And I’ll be honest with you. It’s a joy to serve with a president who does not apologize for the United States of America. Mr. Mondale, on the other hand, has one idea. Go out and tax the American people. And then he wants to repeal indexing, to wipe out the one protection that those at the lowest end of the economic scale have protecting them against being rammed into higher and higher tax brackets. We just owe our country too much to go back to that kind of an approach. I’d like to say something to the young people. I started a business. I know what it is to have a dream and have a job and work hard to employ others and really to participate in the American dream. Some of you out there are finishing high school or college and some of you are starting out in the working place. And we want for you America’s greatest gift. And that is opportunity. And then, peace. Yes, I did serve in combat. I was shot down when I was a young kid, scared to death. And all that did, saw friends die, but that heightened my convictions about peace. It is absolutely essential that we guarantee the young people that they will not know the agony of war. America’s gift, opportunity and peace. Now we do have some unfinished business. We must continue to go ahead. The world is too complex to go back to vacillation and weakness. We’ve too much going on to go back to the failed policies of the past. The future is too bright not to give it our best shot. Together we can go forward and lift America up to meet her greatest dreams. Thank you very much.
