Do I have 1 minute? Just the ground rules here.

Well, he doesn’t like trickle down government but I think he’s talking about the Reagan-Bush years where we created 15 million jobs. The rich are paying a bigger percent of the total tax burden. And what I don’t like is trickle down government. And therein, I think Governor Clinton keeps talking about trickle down, trickle down, and he’s still talking about spending more and taxing more.

Government — he says invest government, grow government. Government doesn’t create jobs. If they do, they’re make-work jobs. It’s the private sector that creates jobs. And yes, we’ve got too many taxes on the American people and we’re spending too much.

And that’s why I want to get the deficit down by controlling the growth of mandatory spending. It won’t be painless. I think Mr. Perot put his finger on something there. It won’t be painless but we’ve got to get the job done. But not by raising taxes.

Mr. and Mrs. America, when you hear him say we’re going to tax only the rich, watch your wallet because his figures don’t add up and he’s going to sock it right to the middle class taxpayer and lower, if he’s going to pay for all the spending programs he proposes.

So we have a big difference on this trickle down theory. I do not want any more trickle down government. It’s gotten too big. I want to do something about that.

I think everybody’s paying too much taxes. He refers to one tax increase. Let me remind you it was a Democratic tax increase, and I didn’t want to do it and I went along with it. And I said I make a mistake. If I make a mistake, I admit it. That’s quite different than some. But I think that’s the American way.

I think everyone’s paying too much, but I think this idea that you can go out and — then he hits me for vetoing a tax bill. Yes, I did. And the American taxpayer ought to be glad they have a president to stand up to a spending Congress. We remember what it was like when we had a spending president and a spending Congress, and interest rates — who remembers that? They were at 21.5% under Jimmy Carter, and inflation was 15. We don’t want to go back to that.

And so yes, everybody’s taxed too much and I want to get the taxes down, but not by signing a tax bill that’s gonna raise taxes on people.

Well, the record in Arkansas. I mean, look at it, and that’s what we’re asking America to have? Now look, he says Arkansas’s a poor state. They are. But in almost every category they’re lagging. I’ll give you an example. He talks about all the jobs he’s created in one or 2 years. Over the last ten years since he’s been governor, they’re 30% behind, 30% — they’re 30% of the national average. On pay for teachers, on all these categories, Arkansas is right near the very bottom.

You haven’t heard me mention this before, but we’re getting close now and I think it’s about time I start putting things in perspective. And I’m going to do that. It’s not dirty campaigning because he’s been talking about my record for a half a year here, 11 months here. So we’ve got to do that. I gotta get it in perspective.

What’s his mistake? Admit it, that Arkansas is doing very, very badly against any standard — environment, support for police officers, whatever it is.

This year.

I don’t have a dog in this fight, but I’d like to get in on this.

Governor Clinton has to operate under a balanced budget amendment — he has to do it, that is the law. I’d like to see a balanced budget amendment for America, to protect the American taxpayers, and then that would discipline not only the executive branch but the spending Congress, the Congress that’s been in control of one party, his party, for 38 years. And we almost had it done.

And that institution, the House of Representatives — everyone is yelling “Clean House!” One of the reasons is we almost had it done, and the speaker — a very, able, decent fellow, I might add — but he twisted the arms of some of the sponsors of that legislation and had them change their vote. What’s relevant here is that tool, that discipline, that he has to live by in Arkansas, and I’d like it for the American people. I want the line-item veto. I want a check-off, so if the Congress can’t do it, let people check off their income tax, 10% of it, to compel the government to cut spending. And if they can’t do it, if the Congress can’t do it, let them then have to do it across the board. That’s what we call a sequester. That’s the discipline we need, and I’m working for that — to protect the American taxpayer against the big spenders.

Jim, I don’t think that’s a fair shot. I hear it — I hear it echoed by political opponents. But I don’t think it’s fair. I think we’ve been fighting from day one to do something about the inner cities. I’m for enterprise zones. I have had it in every single proposal I’ve sent to the Congress. And now we hear a lot of talk, oh, well, we all want enterprise zones, and yet the House and the Senate can’t send it down without loading it up with a lot of, you know, these Christmas tree ornaments they put on the legislation.

I don’t think in racial harmony that I’m a laggard on that. I’ve been speaking out since day 1. We’ve gotten the Americans for Disabilities Act, which I think is one of the foremost pieces of civil rights legislation. And yes, it took me to veto 2 civil rights quota bills because I don’t believe in quotas, and I don’t think the American people believe in quotas. And I beat back the Congress on that, and then we passed a decent civil rights bill that offers guarantees against discrimination in employment.

And that is good.

I’ve spoken out over and over again against antisemitism and racism, and I think my record as a member of Congress speaks for itself on that.

What was the other part of it?

I don’t think that’s true at all. I don’t think that’s true, but you know, let others fire away on it.

Well, I think you’re overlooking that we have had major accomplishments in the first term. But if you’re talking about protecting the taxpayer against his friends in the US Congress, go back to what it was like when you had a Democratic president and a Democratic Congress. You don’t have to go back to Herbert Hoover. Go back to Jimmy Carter, and interest rates were 21%, inflation was 15%. The misery index — unemployment and inflation added together — it was invented by the Democrats — went right through the roof. We’ve cut it in half.

And all you hear about is how bad things are. You know, remember the question, are you better off? Well, is a homebuyer better off he can refinance the home, because interest rates are down? Is the senior citizen better off because inflation is not wiping out their family’s savings? I think they are. Is the guy out of work better off? Of course he’s not, but he’s not gonna be better off if we grow the government, if we invest, as Governor Clinton says, invest in more government.

You’ve got to free up the private sector. You’ve got to let small businesses have more incentives. For 3 months — quarters I’ve been fighting, 3 quarters been fighting to get the Congress to pass some incentives for small business. Capital gains, investment tax allowance, credit for first- time homebuyers. And it’s blocked by the Congress. And then if a little of it comes my way, they load it up with Christmas trees and tax increases, and I have to stand up and favor the taxpayer.

To this?

Well, I wondered, when Governor Clinton was talking to the auto workers, whether he talked about his and Senator Gore’s favoring CAFE standards, fuel efficiency standards, of 40 miles per gallon. That would break the auto industry and throw a lot of people out of work.

As regarding Mr. Perot, I take back something I said about him. I once said, in a frivolous moment, when he got out of the race: If you can’t stand the heat, buy an air conditioning company. And I take it back, because I think — he said he made a mistake. And the thing I find is if I make a mistake, I admit it. I’ve never heard Governor Clinton make a mistake.

But one mistake he’s made is fuel efficiency standards at 40 to 45 miles a gallon will throw many auto workers out of work, and you can’t have it both ways. There’s a pattern here of appealing to the auto workers and then trying to appeal to the spotted owl crowds or the extremes in the environmental movement. You can’t do it as president: you can’t have a pattern of one side of the issue one day and another the next.

So my argument is not with Ross Perot; it is more with Governor Clinton.

I’m caught in the middle on NAFTA. Ross says, with great conviction, he opposes the North American Free Trade Agreement. I am for the North American Free Trade Agreement. My problem with Governor Clinton, once again, is that one time he’s gonna make up his mind, he sees some merit in it, but then he sees a lot of things wrong with it. Then the other day he says he’s for it, however then we’ve got to pass other legislation.

When you’re president of the US, you cannot have this pattern of saying well, I’m for it but I’m on the other side of it. And it’s true on this and it’s true on CAFE.

Look, if Ross were right when we get a free trade agreement with Mexico, why wouldn’t they have gone down there now? You have a differential in wages right now. I just have an honest philosophical difference. I think free trade is going to expand our job opportunity. I think it is exports that have saved us when we’re in a global slowdown, a connected global slowdown, a recession in some countries. And it’s free trade, fair trade that needs to be our hallmark, and we need more free trade agreements, not fewer.

I think he made my case. On the one hand, it’s a good deal but on the other hand I’d make it better. You can’t do that as president. You can’t do it on the war, where he says well, I was with the minority but I guess I would have voted with the majority.

This is my point tonight. We’re talking about 2 weeks from now you’ve gotta decide who’s gonna be president. And there is this pattern that has plagued him in the primaries and now about trying to have it both ways on all these issues. You can’t do that. And if you make a mistake, say you made a mistake and go on about your business, trying to serve the American people.

Right now we heard it. Ross is against it. I am for it. He says on the one hand I am for it and on the other hand I may be against it.

But I’ve always said trickle-down government is bad.

Yes.

Most people that are lobbying are lobbying the Congress. And I don’t think there’s anything wrong with an honest person who happens to represent an interest of another country for making his case. That’s the American way. And what you’re assuming is that that makes the recipient of the lobbying corrupt or the lobbyist himself corrupt. I don’t agree with that.

But if I found somebody that had a conflict of interest that would try to illegally do something as a foreign — registered lobby, the laws cover this. I don’t know why — I’ve never understood quite why Mr. Perot was so upset it, because one of the guys he used to have working for him, I believe, had foreign accounts. Could be wrong, but I think so.

Well —

(APPLAUSE)

But I don’t — I think you got to look at the integrity and the honor of the people that are being lobbied and those that are lobbyists. The laws protect the American taxpayer in this regard. If the laws are violated so much, but to suggest if somebody represents a foreign country on anything, that makes him corrupt or against the taxpayer, I don’t agree with that.

I promise it’s less than 10 seconds.

I heard Gov Clinton congratulate us on 1 thing — first time he said something pleasant about this administration. Productivity in this country is up, it is way up — productivity is up. And that’s a good thing. There are many good ones, but I was glad he acknowledged that. Thank you.

Uh-uh. Uh-uh.

(APPLAUSE)

Well, I’ve expressed my heartfelt difference with Governor Clinton on organizing demonstrations while in a foreign land against your country, when young ghetto kids have been drafted and are dying.

My argument with him on — the question was about the draft — is that there’s this same pattern. In New Hampshire Senator Kerrey said you ought to level, you ought to tell the truth about it. On April 17 he said he’d bring out all the records on the draft. They have not been forthcoming. He got a deferment or he didn’t. He got a notice or he didn’t. And I think it’s this pattern that troubles me, more than the draft. A lot of decent, honorable people felt as he did on the draft. But it’s this pattern.

And again, you might be able to make amendments all the time, Governor, but you’ve got to, as president, you can’t be on all these different sides, and you can’t have this pattern of saying well, I did this or I didn’t, then the facts come out and you change it.

That’s my big difference with him on the draft. It wasn’t failing to serve.

Yes, sir. Helen?

I wouldn’t have taken any of the alternatives. I believe that — I believe I made a mistake. I did it for the very reasons you say. There was one good thing that came out of that budget agreement, and that is we put a cap on discretionary spending. One-third of the president’s budget is at the president’s discretion, or really the Congress, since they appropriate every dime and tell a president how to spend every dime. We’ve put a cap on the growth of all that spending, and that’s good and that’s helped.

But I was wrong because I thought the tax compromise, going along with 1 Democratic tax increase, would help the economy. I see no evidence that it has done it.

So what would I have done? What should I have done? I should have held out for a better deal that would have protected the taxpayer and not ended up doing what we had to do, or what I thought at the time would help.

So I made a mistake, and I — you know, the difference, I think, is that I knew at the time I was going to take a lot of political flak. I knew we’d have somebody out there yelling “read my lips”, and I did it because I thought it was right. And I made a mistake. That’s quite different than taking a position where you know it’s best for you. That wasn’t best for me and I knew it in the very beginning. I thought it would be better for the country than it was. So there we are.

(APPLAUSE)

I would like the record to show the panelists that Ross Perot took the first shot at the press. My favorite bumper sticker, though, is: Annoy the Media. Re-elect President Bush. And I just had to work that in. Sorry, Helen.

(Laughter and applause)

I’m going to pay for this later on. Look, you have to build a consensus, but in some things — Ross mentioned Saddam Hussein. Yes, we tried, and, yes, we failed to bring him into the family of nations; he had the 4th largest army. But then when he moved against Kuwait, I said this will not stand. And it’s hard to build a consensus. We went to the UN, we made historic resolutions up there, the whole world was united, our Congress was dragging its feet. Governor Clinton said, well, I might have been with the minority, let sanctions work — but I guess I would have voted with the majority.

A president can’t do that. Sometimes he has to act. And in this case I’m glad we did, because if we had let sanctions work and tried to build a consensus on that, Saddam Hussein today would be in Saudi Arabia controlling the world’s oil supply, and he would be there maybe with a nuclear weapon. We busted the 4th largest army, and we did it through leadership.

You don’t see Margaret Tutwiler sitting in there with me today.

Huh?

I happen to think she’s a key person. I think our Cabinet members are key people. I think the woman that works with me, Rose Zamaria, is about as tough as a boot out there and makes some discipline and protects the taxpayer.

Look at our Cabinet. You talk about somebody strong. Look at Carla Hills. Look at Lynn Martin, who’s fighting against this glass ceiling and doing a first-class job on it. Look at our surgeon general, Dr. Novello. You can look all around and you’ll see first-class strong women.

Jim Baker’s a man. Yeah, I plead guilty to that.

(Laughter)

But look who’s around with him there. I mean, this is a little defensive on your part, Susan, to be honest with you. We’ve got a very good record appointing women to high positions and positions of trust, and I’m not defensive at all about it. What we got to do is keep working, as the Labor Dept is doing a first-class job on, to break down discrimination, to break down the glass ceiling.

And I am not apologetic at all about our record with women. We’ve got, I think — you know, you think about women in government, I think about women in business. Why not try to help them with my small business program to build some incentives into the system? I think we’re making progress here.

You got a lot of women running for office. As I said the other night, I hope a lot of them lose because they’re liberal Democrats —

(Laughter)

— and we don’t need more of them in the Senate or more of them in the House. But nevertheless, they’re out there. And we got some very good Republican women running. So we’re making dramatic progress.

I’ve got reply on that. That gets to the national honor. We did not say to Saddam Hussein, Ross, you can take the northern part of Kuwait.

That is absolutely absurd.

Glaspie has testified —

(APPLAUSE)

— and Glaspie’s papers have been presented to the US Senate. Please, let’s be factual.

For which I apologize. When I make a mistake I say I’m sorry.

(Laughter.)

No, I don’t. I apologize for it but that one got right to the national honor and I’m sorry. I just couldn’t let it stand.

Well, it’s awful easy when you’re dealing with 90-90 hindsight. We did try to bring Saddam Hussein into the family of nations; he did have the 4th largest army. All our Arab allies out there thought we ought to do just exactly that. And when he crossed the line, I stood up and looked into the camera and I said: This aggression will not stand. And we formed a historic coalition, and we brought him down, and we destroyed the 4th largest army. And the battlefield was searched, and there wasn’t one single iota of evidence that any US weapons were on that battlefield. And the nuclear capability has been searched by the United Nations, and there hasn’t been one single scintilla of evidence that there’s any US technology involved in it.

And what you’re seeing on all this Iraq-gate is a bunch of people who were wrong on the war trying to cover their necks here and try to do a little revisionism. And I cannot let that stand, because it isn’t true.

Yes, we had grain credits for Iraq, and there isn’t any evidence that those grain credits were diverted into weaponry — none, none whatsoever.

(APPLAUSE)

And so I just have to say, it’s fine. You can’t stand there, Governor Clinton, and say, well, I think I’d have been — I have supported the minority, let sanctions work or wish it would go away — but I would have voted with the majority. Come on, that’s not leadership.

Well, I don’t believe it would be appropriate for a president to suggest that the banking system is not sound. It is sound. There are some problem banks out there. But what we need is financial reform; we need some real financial reform, banking reform legislation. And I have proposed that. And when I am re-elected, I believe one of the first things ought to be to press a new Congress not beholden to the old ways to pass financial reform legislation that modernizes the banking system, doesn’t put a lot of inhibitions on it, and protects the depositors through keeping the FDIC sound.

But I think that — I just was watching some of the proceedings of the American Bankers Assn, and I think the general feeling is most of the banks are sound, certainly there’s no comparison here between what happened to the S&Ls and where the banks stand right now, in my view.

On government reform?

Government reform?

Well, how about this for a government reform policy? Reduce the White House staff by a 3rd after or at the same time the Congress does the same thing for their staff. Term limits for members of the US Congress. Give the government back to the people. Let’s do it that way. The president has term limits. Let’s limit some of these guys sitting out here tonight.

(APPLAUSE)

Term limits. And then how about a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution? Forty-3 — more than that — states have it, I believe. Let’s try that. And you want to do something about all this extra spending that concerns Mr. Perot and me? Okay. How about a line item veto? Forty-three governors have that. And give it to the president, and if the Congress isn’t big enough to do it, let the president have a shot at this excess spending. A line item veto. That means you can take a line and cut out some of the pork out of a meaningful bill.

Governor Clinton keeps hitting me on vetoing legislation. Well, that’s the only protection the taxpayer has against some of these reckless pork programs up there, and I’d rather be able to just line it right out of there and get on about passing some good stuff but leave out the garbage. Line item veto — there’s a good reform program for you.

That’s what worries me —

(Laughter and applause)

— that he’s going to be responsible. He’s going to do — and he would do for the US what he’s done to Arkansas. He would do for the US what he’s done to Arkansas. We do not want to be the lowest of the low. We are not a nation in decline.

(APPLAUSE)

We are a rising nation.

Now, my problem is — I heard what he said. He said I want to take it from the rich, raise $150 billion from the rich. To get it, to get $150 billion in new taxes, you got to go down to the guy that’s making $36,600. And if you want to pay for the rest of his plan, all the other spending programs, you’re going to sock it to the working man.

So when you hear “tax the rich,” Mr. and Mrs. America, watch your wallet. Lock your wallet because he’s coming right after you just like Jimmy Carter did and just like you’re going to get — you’re going to end up with interest rates at 21%, and you’re going to have inflation going through the roof.

Yes, we’re having tough times, but we do not need to go back to the failed policies of the past, when you had a Democratic president and a spendthrift Democratic Congress.

(APPLAUSE)

Well, I think the answer to why the drop, I think, has been the economy in the doldrums. Why I’ll win is I think I have the best plan of the 3 of us up here to do something about it. Mine does not grow the government, it does not invest, have government invest.

It says we need to do better in terms of stimulating private business. We got a big philosophical difference here tonight between one who thinks the government can do all these things through tax and spend, and one who thinks it ought to go the other way.

And so I believe the answer is, I’m going to win it because I’m getting into focus my agenda for America’s renewal, and also I think that Governor Clinton’s had pretty much of a free ride. On looking specifically at the Arkansas record — he keeps criticizing us, criticizing me, I’m the incumbent, fine. But he’s an incumbent, and we’ve got to look at all the facts. They’re almost at the bottom on every single category. We can’t do that to the American people.

And then, Helen, I really believe where people are going to ask this question about trust, because I do think there’s a pattern by Governor Clinton of saying one thing to please one group, and then trying to please another group. And I think that pattern is a dangerous thing to suggest would work for the Oval Office. It doesn’t work that way when you’re president.

Truman is right. The buck stops there. And you have to make decisions even when it’s against your own interest. And I’ve done that. It’s against my political interest to say go ahead and go along with the tax increase, but I did what I thought was right at the time. So I think people are going to be looking for trust and experience.

And then, I mentioned it the other night, I think if there’s a crisis, people are going to say, well, George Bush has taken us through some tough crises, and we trust him to do that.

And so I’ll make the appeal on a wide array of issues. Also I got a philosophical difference. I got to watch the clock here. I don’t think we’re a declining nation. The whole world has had economic problems. We’re doing better than a lot of the countries in the world. And we’re going to lead the way out of this economic recession across this world and economic slowdown here at home.

That’s why I think I’ll win.

Three weeks from now — 2 weeks from tomorrow, America goes to the polls and you’re going to have to decide who you want to lead this country to economic recovery. On jobs — that’s the number one priority, and I believe my program for stimulating investment, encouraging small business, brand-new approach to education, strengthening the American family, and, yes, creating more exports is the way to go. I don’t believe in trickle-down government, I don’t believe in larger taxes and larger government spending.

On foreign affairs, some think it’s irrelevant. I believe it’s not. We’re living in an interconnected world. The whole world is having economic difficulties. The US is doing better than a lot. But we’ve got to do even better. And if a crisis comes up, I ask who has the judgment and the experience and, yes, the character to make the right decision?

And, lastly, the other night on character Governor Clinton said it’s not the character of the president but the character of the presidency. I couldn’t disagree more. Horace Greeley said the only thing that endures is character. And I think it was Justice Black who talked about great nations, like great men, must keep their word.

And so the question is, who will safeguard this nation, who will safeguard our people and our children? I need your support, I ask for your vote. And may God bless the US of America.

(APPLAUSE)
